# Abstract

We studied the enhancement of the global horizontal irradiance (GHI),
over Thessaloniki, for the period 1993 -- 2023, on one minute average
records. We identify the cloud enhancement events (CE), by creating an
appropriate clear sky irradiance reference with the use of a radiation
transfer model, and aerosol optical depth (AOD) data, from the AERONET,
and a collocated Brewer photospectrometer. We found that there is a
trend of CE cases of $45.6 \pm 21.9\,\text{cases}/\text{year}$, and a
mean total energy change, of the CE events by
$116.9 \pm 67.8\,\text{kj}/\text{year}$ with the peak of the CE events
are observed during May and June. An analysis of the total duration of
CE events, showed that durations longer than 5 minutes are very rare,
with exceptions lasting over an hour. We have detected enhancements over
the total solar irradiance, without exceeding the maximum values
reported for other sites, with more favorable CE conditions.

CE: cloud enhancement cases one minute

ECE: extreme cloud enhancement cases one minute over TSI on horizontal
plane

CEG: cloud enhancement groups, cases events with consecutive CE

$\text{GHI}_{\text{i}}$: measured one minute global horizontal
irradiance

$\text{GHI}_{\text{CSm}}$: modelled clear sky one minute global
horizontal irradiance

# 1 Introduction

The shortwave solar radiation, reaching Earth's surface, is the main
energy source of the atmosphere and the biosphere, and drives and
governs the climate (Gray et al. 2010). It has direct practical
application; in industries like energy and agricultural production. The
variability of its intensity; can impose difficulties in predicting the
yield; and in designing the specifications of the appropriate equipment.
Significant portion of research has been focused on predicting the
renewable energy production in a fine timescale and in near real-time
(for a review see Inman, Pedro, and Coimbra (2013); Graabak and Korpås
(2016)).

An important aspect of the variability of solar radiation is its
interaction with the clouds. In general, clouds can attenuate a fraction
of solar irradiance, but under certain conditions, can lead to
enhancement of the global horizontal irradiance (GHI) reaching the
ground. This effect can locally increase the observed GHI to levels even
higher than the expected clear-sky irradiance (Cordero et al. 2023;
Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis 2020; Castillejo-Cuberos and
Escobar 2020; Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis 2020 and references
therein).

Some of the proposed underling mechanisms of those enhancements, have
been summarized by Gueymard (2017); the most important being the
scattering of radiation on the edges of cumulus clouds. It has been also
suggested that enhancement of GHI can be produced by thin cirrus clouds
though refraction and scattering (Thuillier et al. 2013). Further
investigation with radiative transfer modeling and observations pointed
as the prevailing mechanism, the strong forward Mie scattering through
clouds of low optical depth (Pecenak et al. 2016; Thuillier et al. 2013;
G. H. Yordanov et al. 2013; Georgi Hristov Yordanov, Saetre, and
Midtgård 2015). Overall, enhancement event depend on different
interactive factors, which include cloud thickness, structure and type,
and the relative position of the sun and the clouds (Gueymard 2017;
Veerman, Van Stratum, and Van Heerwaarden 2022).

On multiple sites, cloud enhancements (CE) have been reported to be able
to briefly exceed the value of the solar constant, resulting of
clearness indices above unit. A summary of extreme enchantment cases
(ECE) has been compiled by Martins, Mantelli, and Rüther (2022). There
are also; some practical implications of the cloud enchantments. The
intensity and duration of enhancements can effect the efficiency and
stability of photovoltaic power production (Lappalainen and Kleissl
2020; Järvelä and Valkealahti 2020); while ECEs have the potential to
compromise the integrity of photovoltaic plants infrastructure (Do
Nascimento et al. 2019). It has also been demonstrated, that these
events can interfere in the comparison of ground-based and satellite
observations (Damiani et al. 2018)

Methods of identification of CE events usually include the use of
simulated clear sky irradiance as baseline, that is combined with an
appropriate threshold or some other statistical characteristics, and in
some cases, with visual inspection of sky camera images (Vamvakas,
Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis 2020; Mol, Knap, and Van Heerwaarden 2023
and references therein).

In this study, we evaluate the effects CE on GHI by investigating their
frequency of occurrence, intensity, and duration in a thirty-year period
of GHI observations at Thessaloniki, Greece. We used modeled clear sky
irradiance, as a baseline to identify cloud enhancements. We were able
to determine some trends of the phenomenon, it's Climatology, and some
of their general characteristics. We weren't able to find a comparable
study that provides trends for similar long term dataset, as ours. The
recording of the GHI signal is the mean of one-minute. Thus, the minimum
resolution of CE events, in this study is one minute.

In the relative bibliography different definition have been used for
these events, some of the are summarized by Gueymard (2017). Here, we
defined as CE events, the cases when the measured GHI at ground level,
exceeds the expected value under clear-sky conditions. Similar, we
define as extreme cloud enhancement events (ECE), the cases when GHI,
exceeds the Total Solar Irradiance (TSI) on horizontal plane at ground
level. Although the duration of these bursts varies, from instantaneous
to several minutes, here we are constrained by the recorded data, to
one-minute steps.

# 2 Data and methodology

## 2.1 GHI data

The monitoring site is operating in the Laboratory of Atmospheric
Physics of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
($40^{\circ}\, 38\prime\,$N, $22^{\circ}\, 57\prime\,$E,
$80\,$m a.s.l.). In this study we present data from the period 13 April
1993 to 31 December 2023. The GHI data were measured with a Kipp & Zonen
CM-21 pyranometer. During the study period, the pyranometer was
independently calibrated three times at the Meteorologisches
Observatorium Lindenberg, DWD, verifying that the stability of the
instrument's sensitivity was better than $0.7\,\%$ relative to the
initial calibration by the manufacturer. For the acquisition of
radiometric data, the signal of the pyranometer was sampled at a rate of
$1\,\text{Hz}$. The mean and the standard deviation of these samples
were calculated and recorded for every minute. The measurements were
corrected for the zero offset ("dark signal" in volts), which was
calculated by averaging all measurements recorded for a period of
$3\,\text{h}$, before (morning) or after (evening) the Sun reaches an
elevation angle of $- 10^{\circ}$. The signal was converted to
irradiance using the ramped value of the instrument's sensitivity
between subsequent calibrations.

To further improve the quality of the irradiance data, a manual
screening was performed, in order to remove inconsistent and erroneous
recordings that can occur stochastically or systematically during the
long operation of the instrument. The manual screening was aided by a
radiation data quality assurance procedure, adjusted for the site, which
was based on the methods of Long and Shi (Long and Shi 2006, 2008).
Thus, problematic recordings have been excluded from further processing.
Although it is impossible to detect all false data, the large number of
available data, and the aggregation scheme we used, ensures the quality
of the radiation measurements used in this study. To preserve an
unbiased representation of the data we applied a constraint, similar the
one used by Castillejo-Cuberos and Escobar (2020). Where, for each valid
hour of day, there must exist at least 45 minutes of valid measurements,
including nighttime, when near sunrise and sunset. Days with less than 5
valid hours were rejected completely. Furthermore, due to the
significant measurement uncertainty, when the Sun is near the horizon,
and due to some systematic obstructions by nearby buildings, we have
excluded all measurements with solar zenith angle (SZA) greater than
$78^{\circ}$.

## 2.2 Cloud enhancement detection

To be able to detect the CE cases, we had to establish a baseline, above
which we characterized each data point as an enhancement event, by
estimating the occurring over irradiance (OIR). The OIR, is defined as
the irradiance difference of the measured one-minute $\text{GHI}_{i}$
from the CE identification criterion
($\text{OIR}_{i} = \text{GHI}_{i} - \text{GHI}_{\text{CSlim}}$), as
defined in Equation. To have an estimation, and a first insight on the
phenomenon, we experimented with two simple approaches for the
reference. The Haurwitz's model (Haurwitz 1945), which is as simple
clear sky model, and we had already adjusted and had good fit with our
data (Natsis, Bais, and Meleti 2023), and the TSI at the top of the
atmosphere. We have tested both cases by using an appropriate relative
threshold and/or an additional constant offset. The initial results,
showed that we can detect a big portion of the CE events. These results
were helpful, as they are independent from unknown factors, and helped
us to establish some criteria to further improve the CE identification.
It was evident, by inspecting the daily plot of irradiance, that changes
on the atmospheric conditions introduced numerous false positive and
false negative results. To produce a more accurate reference, we had to
take into account more factors that effect the clear sky radiation. So
we used a radiation transfer model in order to include the effects of
ADO and the water vapors.

## 2.3 Modeled clear Sky Irradiance

### 2.3.1 Climatology of clear sky irradiance

We approximated the expected clear sky GHI by using the Libradtran
radiation transfer model (Emde et al. 2016), a similar approach, was
also used by Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis (2020) for creating
a clear sky reference for studding cloud enhancement events. Main
factors responsible for the attenuation of the broadband downward solar
radiation in the atmosphere are the aerosols and the water vapors.
Because of the lack of observational data for the whole period, we used
some long term climatological data to recreate the whole period.
Fortunately, our site participates in the Aerosol Robotic Network
(AERONET) (Giles et al. 2019; Buis et al. 1998), as there is in
operation a Cimel photometer since 2003, collocated with the CM-21
pyranometer. The mean monthly AOD on different wavelengths are provided
by AERONET, along with the equivalent water column height in the
atmosphere.

For completeness, we will describe here the main points of the radiation
simulation procedure. We used as input the spectrum of Kurucz (1994) in
the range $280$ to $2500\,\text{nm}$, with the Libradtran radiation
transfer solver "disort" on a "pseudospherical" geometry and the
"LOWTRAN" gas parameterization. For each combination of conditions we
use a SZA step of ${0.2}^{\circ}$. For the atmospheric characteristics,
we iterated on combinations of AOD at $500\,\text{nm}$
($\tau_{500\text{nm}}$) with additional offsets of $\pm 1$ and
$\pm 2\sigma$, and water column ($w$), also with offsets of $\pm 1$ and
$\pm 2\sigma$. We applied them on two atmospheric profiles, from the Air
Force Geophysics Laboratory (AFGL). The "AFGL atmospheric constituent
profile, midlatitude summer" (afglms) and the "AFGL atmospheric
constituent profile, midlatitude winter" (afglmw) (Anderson et al.
1986).

To create a look-up table, that aligns with our dataset, we applied some
adjustments. To account for the Sun's variability, in our one-minute GHI
measurements, we adapted each modeled value by scaling the model's input
spectrum integral, to the corresponding TSI, provided by NOAA
(Coddington et al. 2005). Also, we account for the effect of the Earth
-- Sun distance on the irradiance, by using the distance calculated by
the Astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2022) software library. As
needed, we interpolate the resulting irradiances to the SZA of our
measurements. For each period of the year, we used the appropriate
atmospheric profile (afglms or afglmw). Finally, we calculated the clear
sky irradiance value at the horizontal plane. Thus, we were able to
emulate different atmospheric condition and levels of atmospheric
clearness for the climatological conditions of the site. With this
method, the modeled clear sky irradiances can be directly compared to
each measured one-minute value of GHI, for different conditions of
atmospheric clearness.

### 2.3.2 Long term change of clear sky irradiance

The above clear sky reference values are not enough to describe the long
term variation, due to the changes of the atmospheric constituents,
mainly AOD. As observed by Natsis, Bais, and Meleti (2023), there is a
long term brightening effect, over Thessaloniki for the studied period.
In order to better incorporate this change, we used, estimations of AOD
change derived from two sources. For 1993 -- 2005, Kazadzis et al.
(2007) have found a change of $- 3.8\,\%$ per year at AOD on
$340\,\text{nm}$, using a Brewer spectrophotometer. For 2005 to 2023, we
derived the trend from the available monthly climatological data of
AERONET.

To create a unified trend for the long term change of the clear sky
irradiance, we simulated the values of AOD derived from those sources
with Libradtran. For both inputs, we used the AOD at $500\,\text{nm}$,
which was inferred by the available Ångström coefficients. We choose the
SZA of $55^{\circ}$ as a representative value for all the runs.

According to Kazadzis et al. (2007), in the period 1997 -- 2005, the
mean AOD of $340\,\text{nm}$ was calculated to $0.403$ with the use of a
Brewer spectrophotometer, with a linear trend of $- 3.8 \pm 0.93\,\%$
per year. This corresponds to a change of $0.0153$ per year for the AOD
of $340\,\text{nm}$ . Using the alpha Ångström coefficient of
$\alpha = 1.6$, this translates to a change in Ångström beta coefficient
of $\beta = 0.00272$ per year (or $\beta = 0.084$ in 1997 and
$\beta = 0.059$ in 2005). By interpolating the resulting clear sky
irradiance, we have a trend of $+ 0.21\,\%$ per year for the clear sky
irradiance. For the period 2005 -- 2005 we used the mean monthly values
from AERONET, with a similar simulation scheme. We computed the trend of
clear sky radiation for each month of the year, which gave us a mean
clear sky radiation trend of $+ 0.14\,\%$ per year. We applied this long
term change to the clear sky irradiance, in order to create a more
realistic representation of the irradiance for the whole study period
(Figure).

![Figure 2.1: Simulated long term change of the clear sky irradiance
relevant to its climatological values, due to changed of
AOD.](media/rId25.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.651760717410324in"}

Figure 2.1: Simulated long term change of the clear sky irradiance
relevant to its climatological values, due to changed of AOD.

## 2.4 CE Criteria investigation

Our main focus was to positively identify over irradiance events related
to CEs. For this reason we had to select an appropriate set of
atmospheric parameterization, in Libradtran, and define an relevant
threshold for the CE identification. The selection of the atmospheric
parameterization will provide us with a reference, that has a good
agreement with the clear sky conditions. Additional, with the
implementation of the long term change of AOD, as described above, it
will be able to align well with most of the natural variation of the
physical quantity. The selection of adequate threshold, will allow us to
have a robust method to distinguish the CE cases, which will compensate
for the limited accuracy of the input data, and the natural variability
of the atmosphere.

First, we evaluated the performance of the modelled clear radiation, for
each of the atmospheric level of clearness we have created as reference,
in relation to the measured GHI data, and choose as a representative of
the clear sky radiation, the case where
$\tau_{\text{cs}} = \tau_{500\text{nm}} - 1\sigma$ and
$w_{h\text{cs}} = w_{h} - 1\sigma$ ($\text{GHI}_{\text{CSm}}$). These
values represent a typical atmosphere in Thessaloniki, with low load of
aerosols and humidity, which are the main factor that attenuate the GHI,
excluding clouds. To create the upper limit of CE identification, we
used a value relative to clear sky irradiance ($4\,\%$) with an
additional constant offset of $15\,\text{W}/\text{m}^{2}$, as described
in Equation).

$$\text{CE}:\text{E}_{\text{i}} > 15 + 1.04 \cdot \text{E}_{\text{CSm,i}}\,\,\left\lbrack \text{W}/\text{m}^{2} \right\rbrack$$

where: $\text{E}$ the measured irradiance, $\text{E}_{\text{CSm}}$ the
selected modelled clear sky irradiance, and $i$ each of the one-minute
observation. This is the criterion of our CE identification.

In the process of defining the above details, we implemented an
empirical method, by manual inspection of the CE identification results,
on selected days from the whole dataset. We used seven sets of days,
with characteristics relevant to the efficiency of the identification
threshold. These sets were random groups of about 20 to 30 days with the
following characteristics: (a) the strongest over irradiance CE events,
(b) the largest daily total over irradiance, (c) absence of clouds (by
implementing a clear sky identification algorithm as discussed in
Natsis, Bais, and Meleti (2023)), (d) absence of clouds and absence of
EC events, (e) with at least $60\,\%$ of the day length without clouds
and presence of EC events, (h) random selected days and (i) some manual
selected days that were included during the manual inspection process.
Where it was needed, for some of the edge cases, we also used images
from a sky-cam, to further aid the decisions of the manual inspection.

The definition of the CE events with this method, has a level of
subjectivity. The actual clear sky irradiance, is not known, and can
only be approximated. Although, because our main focus is to be able to
identify the OIR created by the clouds, we expect that we were able to
detect all the major events of OIR due to CE. Where, some CE events,
with very low OIR, may be not detected, these are few and their
magnitude will not effect our results.

Another aspect of the CE events, that is often reported in the relative
bibliography, are cases of extreme cloud enhancement (ECE). These are
cases of CE, where the measured intensity of the irradiance, exceeds the
equivalent TSI on the top of the atmosphere, and detected according to
the Equation.

$$\text{ECE}:\text{GHI}_{\text{i}} > \cos(\theta) \times E_{i \odot}/r_{i}^{2}$$

where: $\theta$ the solar zenith angle, $E_{\odot}$ the solar constant,
$r$ the Sun -- Earth distance, and $i$ each of the one-minute
observation.

To give a better understanding of the CE identification procedure, we
provided an example of the CE identification for a selected day, in the
Appendix (Figure), where the use of the clear sky reference and the
identification threshold are shown, along with the relevant
measurements. Similar, we provided an example plot of data for one year,
where the relation of the GHI and clear sky reference is shown, along
with the OIR intensity (Appendix Figure).

# 3 Results

Our dataset, after the data selection processing, consists of 6144534
records of GHI measurements, of which $1.764\,\%$ were identified as CE
events and $0.036\,\%$ as ECE events. The highest recorded GHI due to CE
was $1416.6\,\text{W}/\text{m}^{2}$ on 24 May 2007, and had the maximum
value of OIR at $345.9\,\text{W}/\text{m}^{2}$. The relative stronger CE
event was $49.7\,\%$ above the clear sky threshold, on 28 October 2016.

## 3.1 Long term trends

We computed the daily trend of the mean OIR of CE using a first-order
autoregressive model with a lag of one day, with the 'maximum
likelihood' fitting method (Gardner, Harvey, and Phillips 1980; Jones
1980) by implementing the function 'arima' from the library 'stats' of
the R programming language (R Core Team 2023). The trends are reported
together with the $2\sigma$ error. We observed a negligible change of
$0.087 \pm 0.08\,\text{W}/\text{m}^{2}/\text{year}$ on the mean OIR.
Although, the previous result is closer to the raw data, we preferred to
present the annual statistics, that give a more clear picture about the
long term CE trends. Hence, we calculated the annual values from the
one-minute measurements. Despite the very weak statistical significance
of the mean OIR trend, the annual number of CE occurrences shows a
steady increase of $45.6 \pm 21.9\,\text{cases}/\text{year}$ (Figure).
Subsequently, the mean annual energy of the CE events is increasing with
a rate of $116.9 \pm 67.8\,\text{kj}/\text{year}$ (Figure ), witch
follows the trend of the number of CE occurrences. We have to note that
the energy related to the CE events can not be directly linked with the
total energy balance of the atmosphere. The net solar radiation of the
region is not increased, but rather redistributed through the CE events.
This also is depicted by the "instantaneous" values of irradiance
(average over one minute), that can exceed the equivalent clear sky
irradiance to a considerable level.

![Figure 3.1: Trends of the mean OIR per
CE.](media/rId33.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6399048556430444in"}

Figure 3.1: Trends of the mean OIR per CE.

![Figure 3.2: Trend of yearly cloud enhancement
occurrences.](media/rId37.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.651760717410324in"}

Figure 3.2: Trend of yearly cloud enhancement occurrences.

![Figure 3.3: Trend of the yearly excess energy due to CE over
irradiance](media/rId41.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6399048556430444in"}

Figure 3.3: Trend of the yearly excess energy due to CE over irradiance

## 3.2 Cloud enhancements climatology

Another interesting aspect of the CE cases occurrences, is their
seasonal cycle. In Figure, we have the monthly box plot (whisker plot),
where the values have been normalized by the highest median value, that
occurs on June. Although the number of occurrences has a wide spread
throughout the study period, the most active period of CE occurrences is
during May and June. During the Winter (December -- February) the CE
cases are about $25\,\%$ of the maximum. For the rest months, the
occurrences gradually ramp between the maximum and minimum. This
seasonality is a combinations of the clouds occurrences, and the
relevant position of the sun during each season of the year.
Unfortunately, the lack of detailed data on cloud formation, type and
location is not allowing further analysis.

![Figure 3.4: Seasonal statistics of the number of CE occurrences for
each month, normalized to the maximum occurrences on June. The box
represents the values of the low 25\\,\\% percentile to 75\\,\\%
percentile, where the thick horizontal line inside is the mean, the
vertical lines extend to the maximum and minimum values, the dots are
outlier values, and the rhombus is the
mean.](media/rId46.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.473915135608049in"}

The distribution of the OIR intensity, follows an exponential decline
Figure, where there is an inverse relation between the CE events
frequency and their intensity. This is expected, as the stronger the CE
events become, the rarer the particular atmospheric and sun conditions
can occur. This fact, is indicative to the magnitude and the probability
of the expected OIRs events over Thessaloniki. Similar distribution of
CE occurrences have been reported by Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and
Kazantzidis (2020), where the magnitude of OIR were higher due to the
location of the city of Patras, ${2.5}^{\circ}$ closer to the equator.

![Figure 3.5: Distribution of CE over irradiance
magnitude.](media/rId49.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.7067202537182853in"}

Figure 3.5: Distribution of CE over irradiance magnitude.

## 3.3 Groups of cloud enhancement

In order to study the total duration of the CE events, we grouped the
one minute CE events to continuous CE groups (CEG). Thus, a CEG consists
of one or more successive CE cases, and can represent cloud enhancement
conditions spanning a duration of multiple minutes. We have identified
28468 groups of CE in the whole period of study, where the group with
the longest duration lasted 140 minutes on 07 July 2013. By examining
the frequency distribution of the CEG durations (Figure), we can
conclude, that although we detected some CEG with durations longer than
an hour, about $80\,\%$ of the CEG have a duration of less than 5
minutes.

![Figure 3.6: Distribution of CE groups duration in
minutes.](media/rId54.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6591983814523186in"}

Figure 3.6: Distribution of CE groups duration in minutes.

The relation between the duration and the mean OIR intensity of the
groups have also been studied (Figure). We observed that the GCE events
tend to have either long duration, or large intensity. Events with
strong enhancement and long duration are very rare. Similar results on
this relation, have been reported by Zhang et al. (2018), on a study
using a far higher sampling rate than ours.

![Figure 3.7: Relation of the mean over irradiance and duration of GCE,
where the color scale denotes the frequency of the respected
events.](media/rId58.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.687330489938758in"}

Figure 3.7: Relation of the mean over irradiance and duration of GCE,
where the color scale denotes the frequency of the respected events.

## 3.4 Extreme cloud enhancement events

An aspect of the CE events that is commonly reported and has some
significance on the solar energy production infrastructure are the
extreme CE events (ECE). Where solar irradiance exceeds the expected
irradiance on top of the atmosphere (Equation). Analogous to Figure we
have computed the distribution of the number of occurrences of ECE
events by month in Figure. The most active period for ECE events is in
the spring and the start of the summer (March -- June), followed by a
period in the late fall (September and October). This is probably
related to the weather characteristics of these periods, where there are
continuous alternations between clear sky periods and clouds.

![Figure 3.8: Seasonal statistics of the number of ECE occurancies for
each month, normalized to the maximum occurancies on March. The box
represents the values of the low 25\\,\\% percentile to 75\\,\\%
percentile, where the thick horizontal line inside is the mean, the
vertical lines extend to the max imum and minimum vales, the dots are
outlier values, and the rhombus is the
mean.](media/rId63.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.473915135608049in"}

Figure 3.8: Seasonal statistics of the number of ECE occurancies for
each month, normalized to the maximum occurancies on March. The box
represents the values of the low $25\,\%$ percentile to $75\,\%$
percentile, where the thick horizontal line inside is the mean, the
vertical lines extend to the max imum and minimum vales, the dots are
outlier values, and the rhombus is the mean.

The distribution of the ECE events (Figure), shows that there are rare
cases where the OIR can exceed the TSI even more than
$400\,\text{W}/\text{m}^{2}$, with the $75\,\%$ of the cases to be below
$200\,\text{W}/\text{m}^{2}$. Those finds are in accordance with results
form Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis (2020), with the difference
that the OIR values are lower for Thessaloniki.

![Figure 3.9: Distribution of ECE above clear sky threshold, for cases
that are exceeding the
TSI.](media/rId67.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6591983814523186in"}

Figure 3.9: Distribution of ECE above clear sky threshold, for cases
that are exceeding the TSI.

# 4 Discussion and conclusions

By creating a clear sky approximation of the GHI, which represents the
long- and short-term variation of the expected clear sky GHI, we were
able to identify cases of CE events. After analyzing the CE cases, we
found an increase of $45.6 \pm 21.9\,\text{cases}/\text{year}$, with the
mean annual total energy of the CE events increasing with a rate of
$116.9 \pm 67.8\,\text{kj}/\text{year}$. The most active season of CE
events over Thessaloniki is concentrated on early summer, on May and
June.

The magnitude of the ECE events doesn't exceeds the values reported from
sites with more favourable conditions for the phenomenon. Although, the
climatological characteristic of the ECE events, showed that the most
active months are spread on half of the year (March -- June and
September and October). We found that CE conditions, can have a duration
of more than an hour in rare cases, with the bulk of the cases having a
duration under 5 minutes. Some of the characteristics of CE and ECE
events we analysed, have strong similarities with results by Vamvakas,
Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis (2020), for a city southern of
Thessaloniki, with the analogues differences on the intensity of the
solar radiation.

An interpretation of the CE trends, shows that the interaction of GHI
with the clouds, through this 30 year period, is a dynamic phenomenon
that's needs further investigation. Although, to approach it, we need
more long term observations of AOD and clouds characteristics.

# Appendix

![Figure 4.1: Example of cloud identification data for 2019-07-11. Where
are denoted with red circles all the detected CE events, the cloud
interaction with the GHI (blue crosses), and the thresholds of CE and
the threshold of ECE events with red and black line
respectively.](media/rId74.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.8333333333333335in"}

Figure 4.1: Example of cloud identification data for 2019-07-11. Where
are denoted with red circles all the detected CE events, the cloud
interaction with the GHI (blue crosses), and the thresholds of CE and
the threshold of ECE events with red and black line respectively.

![Figure 4.2: Example of the relation of the measured GHI versus the
reference clear sky irradiance for the year 2005, where the intensity of
the detected over irradiance (OIR) is color
coded.](media/rId78.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6280479002624673in"}

Figure 4.2: Example of the relation of the measured GHI versus the
reference clear sky irradiance for the year 2005, where the intensity of
the detected over irradiance (OIR) is color coded.

Anderson, G. P., J. H. Chetwynd, S. A. Clough, E. P. Shettle, and F. X.
Kneizys. 1986. "AFGL Atmospheric Constituent Profiles (0-120km)." Air
Force Geophysics Laboratory, Optical Physics Division.

Astropy Collaboration, Adrian M. Price-Whelan, Pey Lian Lim, Nicholas
Earl, Nathaniel Starkman, Larry Bradley, David L. Shupe, et al. 2022.
"The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-oriented
Open-source Project and the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core
Package." *Astrophysical Journal* 935 (2): 167.
<https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74>.

Buis, J. P. P., A. Setzer, B. N. N. Holben, T. F. F. Eck, I. Slutsker,
D. Tanre, E. Vermote, et al. 1998. "AERONET---a Federated Instrument
Network and Data Archive for Aerosol Characterization." *Remote Sensing
of Environment* 66 (1): 1--16.

Castillejo-Cuberos, Armando, and Rodrigo Escobar. 2020. "Detection and
Characterization of Cloud Enhancement Events for Solar Irradiance Using
a Model-Independent, Statistically-Driven Approach." *Solar Energy* 209
(October): 547--67. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.09.046>.

Coddington, Odele, Judith L. Lean, Doug Lindholm, Peter Pilewskie,
Martin Snow, and NOAA CDR Program. 2005. "NOAA Climate Data Record (CDR)
of Total Solar Irradiance (TSI), NRLTSI Version 2. Daily."
<https://doi.org/10.7289/V55B00C1>.

Cordero, Raúl R., Sarah Feron, Alessandro Damiani, Edgardo Sepúlveda,
Jose Jorquera, Alberto Redondas, Gunther Seckmeyer, Jorge Carrasco,
Penny Rowe, and Zutao Ouyang. 2023. "Surface Solar Extremes in the Most
Irradiated Region on Earth, Altiplano." *Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society* 104 (6): E1206--21.
<https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-22-0215.1>.

Damiani, Alessandro, Hitoshi Irie, Takashi Horio, Tamio Takamura,
Pradeep Khatri, Hideaki Takenaka, Takashi Nagao, Takashi Y. Nakajima,
and Raul R. Cordero. 2018. "Evaluation of Himawari-8 Surface Downwelling
Solar Radiation by Ground-Based Measurements." *Atmos. Meas. Tech.*

Do Nascimento, Lucas Rafael, Trajano De Souza Viana, Rafael Antunes
Campos, and Ricardo Rüther. 2019. "Extreme Solar Overirradiance Events:
Occurrence and Impacts on Utility-Scale Photovoltaic Power Plants in
Brazil." *Solar Energy* 186 (July): 370--81.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.05.008>.

Emde, Claudia, Robert Buras-Schnell, Arve Kylling, Bernhard Mayer, Josef
Gasteiger, Ulrich Hamann, Jonas Kylling, et al. 2016. "The libRadtran
Software Package for Radiative Transfer Calculations (Version 2.0.1)."
*Geoscientific Model Development* 9 (5): 1647--72.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-9-1647-2016>.

Gardner, G., A. C. Harvey, and G. D. A. Phillips. 1980. "Algorithm AS
154: An Algorithm for Exact Maximum Likelihood Estimation of
Autoregressive-Moving Average Models by Means of Kalman Filtering."
*Applied Statistics* 29 (3): 311. <https://doi.org/10.2307/2346910>.

Giles, David M., Alexander Sinyuk, Mikhail G. Sorokin, Joel S. Schafer,
Alexander Smirnov, Ilya Slutsker, Thomas F. Eck, et al. 2019.
"Advancements in the Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET) Version 3
Database -- Automated Near-Real-Time Quality Control Algorithm with
Improved Cloud Screening for Sun Photometer Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD)
Measurements." *Atmospheric Measurement Techniques* 12 (1): 169--209.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/amt-12-169-2019>.

Graabak, Ingeborg, and Magnus Korpås. 2016. "Variability Characteristics
of European Wind and Solar Power Resources---a Review." *Energies* 9
(6): 449. <https://doi.org/10.3390/en9060449>.

Gray, L. J., J. Beer, M. Geller, J. D. Haigh, M. Lockwood, K. Matthes,
U. Cubasch, et al. 2010. "SOLAR INFLUENCES ON CLIMATE." *Reviews of
Geophysics* 48 (4): RG4001. <https://doi.org/10.1029/2009RG000282>.

Gueymard, Christian A. 2017. "Cloud and Albedo Enhancement Impacts on
Solar Irradiance Using High-Frequency Measurements from Thermopile and
Photodiode Radiometers. Part 1: Impacts on Global Horizontal
Irradiance." *Solar Energy* 153: 755--65. <https://doi.org/gb283c>.

Haurwitz, Bernhard. 1945. "Insolation in Relation to Cloudiness and
Cloud Density." *Journal of Meteorology* 2 (September): 154--66.

Inman, Rich H., Hugo T. C. Pedro, and Carlos F. M. Coimbra. 2013. "Solar
Forecasting Methods for Renewable Energy Integration." *Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science* 39 (6): 535--76.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2013.06.002>.

Järvelä, Markku, and Seppo Valkealahti. 2020. "Operation of a PV Power
Plant During Overpower Events Caused by the Cloud Enhancement
Phenomenon." *Energies* 13 (9): 2185.
<https://doi.org/10.3390/en13092185>.

Jones, Richard H. 1980. "Maximum Likelihood Fitting of ARMA Models to
Time Series with Missing Observations." *Technometrics* 22 (3): 389--95.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00401706.1980.10486171>.

Kazadzis, S., A. Bais, V. Amiridis, D. Balis, C. Meleti, N. Kouremeti,
C. S. Zerefos, et al. 2007. "Nine Years of UV Aerosol Optical Depth
Measurements at Thessaloniki, Greece." *Atmospheric Chemistry and
Physics* 7 (8): 2091--101. <https://doi.org/cmjz23>.

Kurucz, Robert L. 1994. "Synthetic Infrared Spectra." In *Infrared Solar
Physics*, edited by D. M. Rabin, J. T. Jefferies, and C. Lindsey,
523--31. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

Lappalainen, Kari, and Jan Kleissl. 2020. "Analysis of the Cloud
Enhancement Phenomenon and Its Effects on Photovoltaic Generators Based
on Cloud Speed Sensor Measurements." *Journal of Renewable and
Sustainable Energy* 12 (4): 043502. <https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0007550>.

Long, Charles N., and Y. Shi. 2006. "The QCRad Value Added Product:
Surface Radiation Measurement Quality Control Testing, Including
Climatology Configurable Limits." DOE/SC-ARM/TR-074. Office of Science,
Office of Biological; Environmental Research, U.S. Department of Energy.

---------. 2008. "An Automated Quality Assessment and Control Algorithm
for Surface Radiation Measurements." *The Open Atmospheric Science
Journal*, 23--37.

Martins, G. L., S. L. Mantelli, and R. Rüther. 2022. "Evaluating the
Performance of Radiometers for Solar Overirradiance Events." *Solar
Energy* 231 (January): 47--56.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2021.11.050>.

Mol, Wouter B., Wouter H. Knap, and Chiel C. Van Heerwaarden. 2023. "Ten
Years of 1 Hz Solar Irradiance Observations at Cabauw, the Netherlands,
with Cloud Observations, Variability Classifications, and Statistics."
*Earth System Science Data* 15 (5): 2139--51.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-15-2139-2023>.

Natsis, Athanasios, Alkiviadis Bais, and Charikleia Meleti. 2023.
"Trends from 30-Year Observations of Downward Solar Irradiance in
Thessaloniki, Greece." *Applied Sciences* 14 (1): 252.
<https://doi.org/10.3390/app14010252>.

Pecenak, Zachary K., Felipe A. Mejia, Ben Kurtz, Amato Evan, and Jan
Kleissl. 2016. "Simulating Irradiance Enhancement Dependence on Cloud
Optical Depth and Solar Zenith Angle." *Solar Energy* 136 (October):
675--81. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.07.045>.

R Core Team. 2023. *R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing*. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
<https://www.R-project.org/>.

Thuillier, Gérard, Jean-Marie Perrin, Philippe Keckhut, and François
Huppert. 2013. "Local Enhanced Solar Irradiance on the Ground Generated
by Cirrus: Measurements and Interpretation." *Journal of Applied Remote
Sensing* 7 (1): 073543. <https://doi.org/10.1117/1.JRS.7.073543>.

Vamvakas, Ioannis, Vasileios Salamalikis, and Andreas Kazantzidis. 2020.
"Evaluation of Enhancement Events of Global Horizontal Irradiance Due to
Clouds at Patras, South-West Greece." *Renewable Energy* 151 (xxxx):
764--71. <https://doi.org/gq3sbh>.

Veerman, M. A., B. J. H. Van Stratum, and C. C. Van Heerwaarden. 2022.
"A Case Study of Cumulus Convection over Land in Cloud‐resolving
Simulations with a Coupled Ray Tracer." *Geophysical Research Letters*
49 (23). <https://doi.org/10.1029/2022GL100808>.

Yordanov, G. H., O.-M. Midtgård, T. O. Saetre, H. K. Nielsen, and L. E.
Norum. 2013. "Overirradiance (Cloud Enhancement) Events at High
Latitudes." *IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics* 3 (1): 271--77.
<https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2012.2213581>.

Yordanov, Georgi Hristov, Tor Oskar Saetre, and Ole-Morten Midtgård.
2015. "Extreme Overirradiance Events in Norway: 1.6 Suns Measured Close
to 60°n." *Solar Energy* 115 (May): 68--73.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2015.02.020>.

Zhang, Junfang, Kota Watanabe, Jun Yoshino, Tomonao Kobayashi, Yoshihiro
Hishikawa, and Takuya Doi. 2018. "Physical Process and Statistical
Properties of Solar Irradiance Enhancement Observed Under Clouds."
*Japanese Journal of Applied Physics* 57 (8): 08RG11.
<https://doi.org/10.7567/JJAP.57.08RG11>.
