---
title: Analysis of cloud enhancement events in a 30-year record of
  global solar irradiance at Thessaloniki, Greece
---

2024-08-27

In this study, we investigate the characteristics of global horizontal
irradiance enhancement events induced by clouds over Thessaloniki for
the period 1994 -- 2023 using data recorded every one minute. We
identified the cloud enhancement (CE) events by creating an appropriate
cloud-free irradiance reference using a radiative transfer model and
aerosol optical depth data from a collocated Cimel sun photometer and a
Brewer spectrophotometer. We found a trend in CE events of
$+ 11145.6 \pm 2721.9\frac{cases}{year}$, and a trend in the
corresponding irradiation of $+ \ 325.2116.9 \pm 8867.8\frac{kJ}{year}$.
The peak of the CE events was observed during May and June. CE events
with duration longer than 10 min are very rare (\<8%), with exceptions
lasting over an hour and up to 140 minutes. Finally, we have detected
enhancements above the total solar irradiance at the top of the
atmosphere for the same solar zenith angle of up to
$209400\frac{W}{m^{2}}$, with $75\%$ of the cases below
$40200\frac{W}{m^{2}}$. Most of these extreme events occur in spring --
early summer, with a secondary peak in autumn.

# 1 Introduction

The shortwave solar radiation, reaching Earth's surface, is the main
energy source for the atmosphere and the biosphere, and drives and
governs the climate (Gray et al. 2010). It has direct practical
application in industries related to energy and agricultural production.
The variability of its intensity can impose difficulties in predicting
the yield and in designing the specifications of the appropriate
equipment. A significant portion of the relevant research has been
focused on predicting the renewable energy production in a fine
timescale and in near real-time (for a review see Inman, Pedro, and
Coimbra 2013; Graabak and Korpås 2016).

An important aspect of the variability of solar radiation is its
interaction with the clouds. In general, clouds can attenuate a fraction
of solar irradiance, but under certain conditions, can lead to
enhancement of the global horizontal irradiance (GHI) reaching the
ground. This cloud enhancement (CE) effect can locally increase the
observed GHI to levels even higher than the expected cloud-free
irradiance \[Cordero et al. (2023); Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and
Kazantzidis (2020); Castillejo-Cuberos and Escobar (2020); and
references therein\].

Some of the proposed underling mechanisms of those enhancements have
been summarized by Gueymard (2017); the most important being the
scattering of radiation on the edges of cumulus clouds. It has also been
suggested that enhancement of GHI can be produced by thin cirrus clouds
though refraction and scattering (Thuillier et al. 2013). Further
investigation with radiative transfer modeling and observations pointed
as the prevailing mechanism, the strong forward Mie scattering through
clouds of low optical depth (Pecenak et al. 2016; Thuillier et al. 2013;
G. H. Yordanov et al. 2013; Georgi Hristov Yordanov, Saetre, and
Midtgård 2015). Overall, the appearance of CE events depend on different
interactive factors, which include cloud thickness, structure and type,
and the relative position of the sun and the clouds (Gueymard 2017;
Veerman, Van Stratum, and Van Heerwaarden 2022).

On multiple sites, cloud enhancements have been reported that exceed
momentarily the solar constant, resulting in clearness indices above
unit. A summary of extreme cloud enhancement (ECE) cases has been
compiled by Martins, Mantelli, and Rüther (2022). Cloud enhancements can
have also some practical implications. The intensity and duration of
enhancements can affect the efficiency and stability of photovoltaic
power production (Lappalainen and Kleissl 2020; Järvelä and Valkealahti
2020), while ECEs have the potential to compromise the integrity of
photovoltaic plants infrastructure (Do Nascimento et al. 2019). It has
also been demonstrated that these events can interfere in the comparison
of ground-based and satellite observations of radiation (Damiani et al.
2018). Global warming has likely affected cloud coverage in the last few
decades. Liu et al. (2023) reported increases in cloud cover over the
tropical and subtropical oceans and decreases over most continents,
while Dong, Sutton, and Wilcox (2023) reported decreases over North
America and Europe. To our knowledge, there is no evidence of whether
this trend has affected also the number and strength of CE events.

Methods of identification of CE events usually include the use of
simulated cloud-free irradiance as baseline, combined with an
appropriate threshold or some other statistical characteristics, and in
some cases, with visual inspection of sky camera images (Vamvakas,
Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis 2020; Mol, Knap, and Van Heerwaarden 2023
and references therein).

In this study, we evaluate the effects of CE events on GHI by
investigating their frequency of occurrence, intensity, and duration in
a thirty-year record of GHI observations at Thessaloniki, Greece. We
used modeled cloud-free irradiance as a baseline to identify cloud
enhancements, and we determined long-term trends of the above-mentioned
metrics, their climatology and some general characteristics. To our
knowledge, there are no other studies that provide trends from such a
long dataset.

# 2 Data and methodology

## 2.1 Instrumentation and data

The data used in this study were recorded at the monitoring site of the
Laboratory of Atmospheric Physics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
in Thessaloniki, Greece ($40^{\circ}38'$N, $22^{\circ}57'$E,
$80$m a.s.l.). The GHI data were measured with a Kipp & Zonen CM-21
pyranometer and cover the period 01 January 1994 to 31 December 2023.
During the study period, the pyranometer was independently calibrated
three times at the Meteorologisches Observatorium Lindenberg, DWD,
verifying that the stability of the instrument's sensitivity was better
than $0.7\%$ relative to the initial calibration by the manufacturer.
For the acquisition of radiometric data, the signal of the pyranometer
was sampled at a rate of $1Hz$ with the mean and standard deviation of
these samples calculated and recorded every minute. The measurements
were corrected for the zero offset ("dark signal" in volts), which was
calculated by averaging all measurements recorded for a period of $3h$,
before (morning) or after (evening) the Sun reaches an elevation angle
of $- 10^{\circ}$. The signal was converted to irradiance using the
ramped value of the instrument's sensitivity between subsequent
calibrations. We note that the specific model of the pyranometer is not
capable in recording the instrument's temperature, therefore any
temperature changes that may occur during the day (including those due
to sudden increases or decreases in incidence irradiance) were not
considered in the data reduction procedure. However, the sensitivity of
the instrument to temperature is less than ±1% for its operational range
(˗20° -- 50°C).

To further improve the quality of the irradiance data, a manual
screening was performed, to remove inconsistent and erroneous recordings
that can occur stochastically or systematically during the long
operation of the instrument. The manual screening was aided by a
radiation data quality assurance procedure, adjusted for the site, which
was based on the methods of Long and Shi (Long and Shi 2006, 2008).
Thus, problematic recordings have been excluded from further processing.
Furthermore, due to the significant measurement uncertainty in GHI when
the Sun is near the horizon, and due to some systematic obstructions by
nearby buildings, we have excluded all measurements with solar zenith
angle (SZA) greater than $78^{\circ}$. Finally, images from a sky camera
have been used in the manual inspection of the CE identification. The
sky camera has been operating since 2012 and stores images in 5 min time
steps. An overview of the GHI data used in this study is given in Figure
1, as the daily means. Daily means were calculated only for days with at
least 60% of data availability; however, all available one-minute
measurements have been used for the detection of CE events.

![](media/image3.png){width="3.03125in" height="1.9375in"}

Figure 1: Timeseries of daily mean GHI measured at Thessaloniki for the
period 1994 -- 2023.

## 2.2 Cloud enhancement detection

In this study, we define an event as CE when the measured GHI at ground
level exceeds the expected value under cloud-free conditions. Similarly,
we define as extreme cloud enhancement events (ECE), the cases when GHI
at ground level exceeds the Total Solar Irradiance (TSI) at the top of
the atmosphere (TOA) for the same SZA. Although the duration of these
bursts can vary from seconds to several minutes, here we are constrained
by the temporal resolution of our data to identify events with a
duration of at minimum one-minute.

For the detection of CE cases, we established a baseline of irradiance
above which we characterized each data point as an enhancement event and
calculated the over irradiance (OI). The OI is defined as the irradiance
difference of the measured one-minute GHI from the ${GHI}_{ref}$
corresponding to cloud-free atmosphere. First, we used a simple approach
for the determination of ${GHI}_{ref}$: The Haurwitz's model (Haurwitz
1945), which is a simple clear sky radiation model and was already
adjusted and applied to our data (Natsis, Bais, and Meleti 2023). We
created a threshold by using an appropriate relative and/or an
additional constant offset. The initial results showed that we can
detect a big portion of the actual CE events. However, by inspecting the
daily plots of irradiance, it became evident that changes in atmospheric
conditions introduced numerous false positive or false negative results.
The main reason for these discrepancies is the variability of the
effects of aerosols and water vapour which were not considered in the
simple method. To produce a more representative reference, we included
the effects of these factors using a radiative transfer model (RTM). The
applied methodology is discussed in section.

## 2.3 Modeled cloud-free Irradiance

### 2.3.1 Climatology of cloud-free irradiance

We approximated the expected cloud-free ${GHI}_{ref}$ with the radiative
transfer model uvspec, part of libRadtran (Emde et al. 2016), similarly
to the approach used by Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis (2020).
In uvspec we used the solar spectrum of Kurucz (1994) in the range $280$
to $2500nm$, the radiative transfer solver "disort" in "pseudospherical"
geometry and the "LOWTRAN" gas parameterization. The model was run for
climatological values of the Angstrom coefficients, water column (WC),
SZA and the appropriate seasonal atmospheric profile to create a look-up
table (LUT) for the estimation of the cloud-free reference irradiance
for each individual observation of our dataset. In this context, the
model was run for SZAs in the range $10$ -- $90^{\circ}$ with a step of
${0.2}^{\circ}$ and for the atmospheric profiles of the Air Force
Geophysics Laboratory (Anderson et al. 1986) midlatitude summer and
midlatitude winter, representative of the warm and cold seasons.

Main factors responsible for the attenuation of the broadband downward
solar radiation under cloud free atmospheres are aerosols and water
vapor. At Thessaloniki, such measurements are available since 2003 from
a Cimel sun photometer, which is part of the Aerosol Robotic Network
(AERONET) (Giles et al. 2019; Buis et al. 1998). From the observations
in the period 2003 -- 2023 we calculated the monthly climatological
means and standard deviation ($\sigma$) for the aerosol optical depth
(AOD) at $500nm$ and the equivalent height of the water column. The
monthly climatological values of AOD and WC, as well as combinations
with additional offsets of $\pm 1\sigma$ and $\pm 2\sigma$, were used as
inputs to the RTM in the construction of the LUT.

For each measurement of the dataset, we calculated from the LUT a
${GHI}_{ref}$ value for the respective season and SZA (by linear
interpolation), and for the climatological values of AOD and WC of the
respective month. The same procedure was followed for the estimation of
the ${GHI}_{ref}$ for all combinations of the AOD and WC with the
above-mentioned standard deviation offsets. Finally, each ${GHI}_{ref}$
value was adjusted to the actual Sun-Earth distance derived by the
Astropy software library (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2022).

### 2.3.2 Long-term change of cloud-free irradiance

The cloud-free reference values discussed above are based on the
climatological AOD and WC; hence they cannot describe accurately the
long-term variation of ${GHI}_{ref}$ due to long-term changes in the two
atmospheric constituents, mainly AOD. As reported by Natsis, Bais, and
Meleti (2023), there is a long-term brightening effect in the GHI data
of Thessaloniki for the period 1994 -- 2023, which for cloud-free data
was attributed to long-term changes in aerosol effects. Therefore, an
adjustment of the ${GHI}_{ref}$ during the period of study was made
using RTM simulations to account for the long-term variations of the
AOD. High quality AOD data with a Cimel sun-photometer (part of AERONET)
at Thessaloniki start only in 2003, while spectral AOD measurements
using direct-sun observations with a MKIII Brewer spectrophotometer are
available for the period 1997--2017. These data are taken sporadically
during each day and are less dense compared to the AERONET data. By
comparing monthly AOD data at 340 nm of the two instruments for the
common periods of operation, we adjusted the Brewer data and filled the
missing months of the Cimel record data with Brewer data. Using the
monthly time series of AOD at 340 nm, as well as monthly climatological
values of the Angstrom exponent and constant WC of $$ derived from the
Cimel record, we simulated with the RTM the cloud-free GHI at SZA of
${}^{}$for each month in the period 1997-2023. The SZA of ${}^{}$ was
chosen as representative of all days in the year to get a rough estimate
of the annually averaged change in cloud-free GHI. A second-degree
polynomial fit was applied to the simulated yearly averaged GHI to
derive the long-term change in GHI due to aerosols: \[Equation inserted
here\]. ${}_{}$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$${}^{}$$$${}_{}$${}^{}$$$Finally, we
applied these long-term changes by Equation to the climatological
${GHI}_{ref}$, to create a more realistic representation of the
cloud-free irradiance for the entire period of study. For the period
1994-1996 where no AOD data are available, we assumed that the changes
in GHI follow the same polynomial fit.

## 2.4 Criteria for the identification of CE events

One of the goals of this study was to quantify the OI related to CEs. A
key issue for achieving this goal is to define a threshold for the CE
identification, representative of the cloud-free irradiance at the time
of each GHI measurement. This depends on the selection of the
appropriate atmospheric parameterization for the RTM simulations. The
implementation of the long-term change in AOD, discussed in section,
allows capturing a large part of the natural variability of cloud-free
GHI. However, the short-term variability of AOD cannot be taken
adequately into account when using monthly values in the model
simulations. We tried different approaches to strengthen the robustness
of the methodology and to compensate for the limited accuracy of the RTM
input data and the unpredictable natural variability of the atmosphere.

First, we evaluated the performance of the modelled ${GHI}_{ref}$ in
relation to the measured GHI for different levels of atmospheric
clearness, by using in the RTM the monthly climatological AOD and WC,
less their respective standard deviations. These values represent
typical atmospheres in Thessaloniki with lower-than-average load of
aerosols and humidity, which are the main factors that attenuate the
GHI, excluding clouds. With this approach, the simulated ${GHI}_{ref}$
should be generally greater than the measured GHI when aerosols are more
abundant. The correlation of the \$\\text{GHI}\_{\\text{ref}}\$ with the
GHI was tested for a subset of cloud-free days with more than 80% data
availability (Figure) and found to have a positive bias of more than 18
W/m\^2 across all levels of radiation. To achieve a robust and clear
distinction of CE cases, we set the criteria of CE detection 25 W/m\^2
above the \$\\text{GHI}\_{\\text{ref}}\$.

\[Figure inserted\]

$E$$GHI$
$CE:E > 15 + 1.04 \cdot {}_{ref}\left\lbrack \frac{}{{}^{2}} \right\rbrack$
To further ensure the effectiveness of this CE criterion, we implement a
manual inspection of the CE identification results on selected days of
the whole dataset. We tested seven sets of days with different
characteristics relevant to the efficiency of the identification
threshold. These sets were random groups of about 20 -- 30 days with the
following characteristics: (a) the strongest OI CE events, (b) the
largest daily total OI, (c) absence of clouds (by implementing a cloud
identification algorithm as discussed in Natsis, Bais, and Meleti
(2023)), (d) absence of clouds and absence of CE events, (e) with at
least $60\%$ of the day length without clouds and presence of CE events,
(h) randomly selected days, and (i) manually selected days. For the
latter case and where needed, we also used images from the sky-camera to
further aid the decision of the manual inspection.

The definition of the CE events with this method has a degree of
subjectivity, since the actual cloud-free irradiance is not known and
can only be approximated. However, this method was proven capable in
detecting all major CE events. Where some CE events with very low OI may
be not detected, these are few with small over-irradiance, and it is
unlikely that will affect significantly our results.

A sub-category of the CE events that is often discussed in the
literature (Cordero et al. 2023; Martins, Mantelli, and Rüther 2022;
Georgi Hristov Yordanov, Saetre, and Midtgård 2015), are the extreme
cloud enhancement (ECE) events. These are cases of CE where the measured
intensity of the irradiance exceeds the TSI on horizontal plane at TOA.
In this case the threshold $E$ is given by:

$ECE:E > cos() \cdot E_{\odot}\frac{r_{m}^{2}}{r^{2}}$

where: $E_{\odot}$ is the solar constant at the mean Sun -- Earth
distance (1361 W/m^2^), as derived from NOAA, $r$ is the actual Sun --
Earth distance, and $r_{m}$ is the mean Sun -- Earth distance of
$1.496 \times 10^{8}km$.

An example of the identification of CE events for a selected day is
given in the Figure, where the daily course of the cloud-free reference
irradiance and the CE and ECE thresholds are shown along with the actual
GHI measurements. The GHI data in the periods 7:30 -- 8:30 and after
14:00 are very close to the modeled cloud-free GHI (light blue line)
thus were identified as cloud-free instances. There is some ambiguity
for the data points laying between the CE threshold and the cloud-free
irradiance, which are not identified as CE events. These data points
correspond to cases either with AOD below the one assumed in the model,
or with very small OI.

In addition, we provide in Figure 4 an example scatter plot between the
measured GHI and the modeled cloud-free irradiance for one year (2005),
where the CE and ECE events are clearly grouped above the cloud-free
irradiance (approximated with the green line). The grey colored data
points above this line correspond to the ambiguous data points discussed
above. Finally, the black belt just below the green line is formed from
data measured mainly under cloud-free conditions, with the spread likely
caused by the short-term variability of AOD. A small fraction of these
data corresponds also to cases with thin cirrus clouds causing weak
attenuation of GHI, often indistinguishable from the attenuation by
aerosols.

![](media/image10.png){width="6.5in" height="4.121527777777778in"}

*Figure 2.2: Example of CE identification in Thessaloniki for
2019-07-11. The green line with blue symbols depicts the measured GHI in
one-minute steps. The red line shows the modelled threshold* $E$*for the
detection of CE events, which are denoted with red circles. The black
line represents the TOA TSI on a horizontal plane, equivalent to the
threshold for the identification of ECE events, shown with red circles.*
*The purple line is the modeled cloud-free irradiance. The dark yellow
line is the solar constant of 1361 W/m^2^*

![Figure 2.3: Example scatter plot of the measured GHI and the reference
clear sky irradiance in Thessaloniki for the year 2005. The
over-irradiance for CE and ECE events is color coded, while the
remaining data points are shown in black. The reference green line goes
through the origin with a slope of
one.](media/image8.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6354166666666665in"}

*Figure 2.3: Example scatter plot of the measured GHI and the reference
cloud-free irradiance in Thessaloniki for the year 2005. The
over-irradiance for CE and ECE events is colour coded, while the
remaining data points are shown in black. The reference green line goes
through the origin with a slope of one.*

# 3 Results

Following the application of the above discussed methodology to the
entire dataset ($6$ million of one-minute GHI measurements), $1.78\%$
were identified as CE events and $0.037\%$ as ECE events. The highest
recorded GHI due to CE was $1416.6\frac{W}{m^{2}}$ on 24 May 2007 at SZA
of ${19.9}^{\circ}$ corresponding to OI of $345.9\frac{W}{m^{2}}$ or
$32.3\%$ above the threshold. The strongest CE event with GHI of ${}^{}$
and OI of ${}^{}$ $$ above the cloud-free threshold was observed on
28 October 2016 at SZA of ${59.2}^{\circ}$. This even is $$ above the
cloud-free threshold. ${}^{}$${}^{}$ Both cases are ECE events exceeding
the TSI on horizontal plane by $168.7\frac{W}{m^{2}}$ and
$155.4\frac{W}{m^{2}}$, respectively. In the following sections we are
discussing the long-term trends and variability of the CE events as well
as of the corresponding OI and excess irradiation.

## 3.1 Long-term trends

One aspect of this study is to investigate the time evolution of the CE
events by analyzing the GHI measurements at Thessaloniki. Cloud
enhancements can be influenced by different factors, such as the
geometry, size and optical thickness of clouds, their height in the
atmosphere and local weather regimes (Mol, Knap, and Van Heerwaarden
2023; Veerman, Van Stratum, and Van Heerwaarden 2022; Gristey et al.
2022; Tzoumanikas et al. 2016). Some of these factors are related to
changes in climate; hence it would be reasonable to expect contributing
to the frequency of occurrence of CE events over Thessaloniki, as well
as to the average OI and excess irradiation. The long-term trends were
calculated using a first-order autoregressive model with the 'maximum
likelihood' fitting method (Gardner, Harvey, and Phillips 1980; Jones
1980), by implementing the function 'arima' from the library 'stats' of
the R programming language (R Core Team 2023). All trends are reported
together with their $2\sigma$ error.

Figure shows the time series of the yearly number of CE cases (each with
duration of one minute), the yearly mean OI and the yearly excess
irradiation for the period 1994 -- 2023, together with corresponding
linear trends. To account for missing data, all three quantities have
been divided with the fraction of the valid GHI observations in each
month. Statistically significant (at the 95% confidence level)
increasing trends appear for the yearly number of CE events
($+ 45.6 \pm 21.9\frac{cases}{year}$) and the excess irradiation
($+ 116.9 \pm 67.8\frac{kJ}{year}$), while the trend in the yearly mean
OI is negligible ($+ 0 \pm 0.1\frac{\frac{W}{m^{2}}}{year}$) and of no
statistical significance. The average OI for the entire period is
$40.1 \pm 2.5\frac{W}{m^{2}}$. The yearly excess irradiation due to CE
events ranges between about 6 and 13 MJ/m^2^. On average, it is about
one fourth of the highest daily irradiation of \~31 MJ/m^2^ under
cloud-free conditions recorded at the summer solstice in Thessaloniki.
Therefore, from solar energy perspective the yearly excess irradiation
is only a tiny fraction of the available solar energy. Although the
interannual variability of the mean OI is rather weak, the variability
about the trend lines is quite large for the number of CE cases and the
excess irradiation (panels b and c). For these two quantities the spread
tends to increase with time, suggesting a significant variability in
cloud patterns over the area, possibly associated to changes in climate.

We must note that the excess irradiation from the CE events that is
received at the surface does not affect the balance of the energy budget
in the atmosphere. The incoming solar radiation in the region is not
increased by the OI but is rather redistributed through the CE events.
This is also depicted by the ECE irradiance values, which exceed the
equivalent cloud-free irradiance by a significant amount.

![](media/image5.png){width="3.15625in" height="6.15625in"}

Figure 5: Time series of (a) the yearly CE number of occurrences, (b)
the yearly mean OI and (c) the yearly excess irradiation at Thessaloniki
for the period 1994 -- 2023. The black lines represent the linear trends
on the yearly data.

## 3.2 Climatology of cloud enhancement events

Next, we investigated the distribution of the CE events within the year.
Figure shows the monthly box and whisker plot of the number of
occurrences of the CE events in percent, calculated relative to the
available one-minute data in each month. Although CE events are present
throughout the year, showing a clear seasonal cycle, the most active
months are May and June, with their median representing about 3% of the
data. The least frequent events (about 1%) occur in August and during
winter (December -- February)$$. This seasonality is a combined effect
of different factors, among them the types of clouds, their frequency of
occurrence, the seasonally varying relative position of the sun, as well
as the local landscape characteristics that may influence the formation
of the clouds. For example, during May and June the frequent formation
of cumulus clouds in the area leads to a significant increase in the CE
events. However, the lack of detailed data in the area of cloud
characteristics does not allow further analysis. Finally, the
interannual variability of the monthly CE events is quite high as
manifested by the size of the boxes and the large monthly extremes,
especially in the summer. Investigation of the causes of this
variability is beyond the scope of this study. It could possibly be
related to the cloud cover variability in winter and autumn over
southern Europe, associated with the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO)
circulation (Chiacchio and Wild, 2010), or to the observed decreasing
trend in cloud cover as a result of global warming (e.g.,
Sanchez-Lorenzo et al, 2017).

![](media/image1.png){width="5.03125in" height="3.0625in"}

*Figure 3.1: Seasonal variability of the relative occurrence of CE
events in Thessaloniki for the period 1994 -- 2023, in the form of a box
and whisker plot. The box contains the data between the lower* $25\%$
*and the upper* $75\%$ *percentiles, with the thick horizontal line
representing the median. The vertical lines (whiskers) extend between
the maximum and minimum monthly values.*

The distribution of the number of CE events as a function of OI is shown
in Figure. There is an inverse relationship between the frequency of CE
events and OI with an exponential-like decline. This is expected, as the
stronger the CE events are, the rarer the conditions favouring the
occurrence of CE events. For the majority (over $62\%$) of the CE events
the OI is below the long-term average of $420.61\frac{W}{m^{2}}$, while
$98.61\%$ of the events correspond to OI larger than
$100\frac{W}{m^{2}}$ and up to the highest value of
$43712.4\frac{W}{m^{2}}$. This distribution is indicative of the
magnitude and the probability of the expected CE events over
Thessaloniki. Similar distribution of CE events, albeit with larger OI
values, has been reported by Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis
(2020), for the city of Patras. This site is located ${2.5}^{\circ}$
south of Thessaloniki and is exposed to air masses coming mainly from
the eastern Mediterranean, resulting in different cloud patterns, that
may affect the characteristics and magnitude of the CE events.

![Figure 3.2: Relative frequency distribution of CE events in
Thessaloniki for the period 1993 -- 2023 as a function of OI. The
histogram was split in two plots with different y-axis scales for better
readability.](media/image6.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.702777777777778in"}

*Figure 3.2: Relative frequency distribution of CE events in
Thessaloniki for the period 1994 -- 2023 as a function of OI. The
histogram was split in two plots with different y-axis scales for better
readability.*

## 3.3 Duration of cloud enhancement events

The duration of the CE events is variable and can last for several
minutes or even more than an hour. To study the characteristics of these
consecutive events, we grouped them into bins of increasing duration in
steps of one minute. We have identified 28062 groups of CE events in the
whole period of study. The group with the longest duration of 140
minutes occurred on 07 July 2013 with SZA ranging between 52.1° and
77.9°. Figure shows the frequency distribution of the CE events
according to their duration. We conclude that although some groups of
events last for more than an hour, about $7980\%$ have a duration of
equal or less than 5 minutes.

![Figure 3.3: Relative frequency distribution of CE groups of consequent
CE events according to their duration for Thessaloniki in the period
1993 -- 2023. The histogram was split in two plots with different y-axis
scales for better
readability.](media/image2.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.7375in"}

*Figure 3.3: Relative frequency distribution of CE groups of consequent
CE events according to their duration for Thessaloniki in the period
1994 -- 2023. The histogram was split in two plots with different y-axis
scales for better readability.*

The relation between the duration and the mean OI of the CE groups is
shown in Figure. As expected, events with small duration and low OI are
accumulated close to the origin of the plot. Events of high excess
irradiation have a short duration and vice versa. The vast majority of
grouped events are associated with small excess irradiation
($5\frac{kJ}{m^{2}}$) and short duration ($5min$). For example, the
excess irradiation of ${}^{}$ is equivalent to an OI of 16.7 W/m^2^ with
duration of 5 min. On the contrary, groups with strong excess
irradiation and long duration are very rare. Similar results of this
relation have been reported by Zhang et al. (2018) in a study using a
far higher sampling rate ($100Hz$) than ours.

![Figure 3.4: Relation of excess irradiation of CE groups with their
duration for Thessaloniki in the period 1993 -- 2023. The logarithmic
color scale denotes the frequency of the respective groups of
events.](media/image11.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6951388888888888in"}

*Figure 3.4: Relation of excess irradiation of CE groups with their
duration for Thessaloniki in the period 1994 -- 2023. The logarithmic
colour scale denotes the frequency of the respective groups.*

## 3.4 Extreme cloud enhancement events

An aspect of the CE events that is commonly reported and has some
significance on the solar energy production infrastructure are the
extreme CE (ECE) events, where the measured GHI exceeds the expected
irradiance at the TOA at the same SZA (Equation). In analogy to Figure
6, we show in Figure 10 the number of ECE events relative to the total
number of one-min observations in each month. Judging by the
distribution of the monthly medians, the most active months in ECE
events are January \-- March and November and the least active are July
and August. The highest interannual variability in the 30-year record
occurs from October to April. In the summer period, the fraction of ECE
events is very small, with almost zero variability in July and August.
Although the most active months for CE events are May and June (Figure
6), these months behave differently for the ECE events, suggesting that
the cumulus clouds that usually cause enhancements of irradiance are
incapable to produce extreme events, possibly because of their size and
structure, in conjunction with the smaller SZAs in the summer.

In general, the fraction of ECE events during the year is very small,
well below 0.1 % of the data, therefore on average it would not affect
the production of solar energy. However, during short, isolated periods
extreme enhancements of GHI can be of concern.

![](media/image4.png){width="5.177083333333333in"
height="3.1930555555555555in"} Figure 3.5: Seasonal variability of the
relative occurrence of ECE events in Thessaloniki for the period 1994 --
2023, in the form of a box and whisker plot. The box contains the data
between the lower $25\%$ and the upper $75\%$ percentiles, with the
thick horizontal line representing the median. The vertical lines
(whiskers) extend between the maximum and minimum monthly values.

The distribution of the ECE events (Figure) shows that in rare cases the
measured GHI exceeds the TOA TSI at the same SZA even by more than
$2400\frac{W}{m^{2}}$, while in $75\%$ of the cases the excess
irradiance is below $4200\frac{W}{m^{2}}$. The 50% OI of the most
frequent ECEs ranges between $140$ and $180\frac{W}{m^{2}}$. These
findings are in accordance with the results of Vamvakas, Salamalikis,
and Kazantzidis (2020), the only difference being that the OI values
reported are higher than those for Thessaloniki.

![](media/image7.png){width="4.0625in" height="2.526388888888889in"}

*Figure 3.6: Relative frequency distribution of ECE events in
Thessaloniki for the period 1994 -- 2023.*

# 4 Conclusions

By creating a cloud-free approximation representing the long- and
short-term variability of the expected cloud-free GHI, we were able to
identify cases of CE events in Thessaloniki for the period 1994 -- 2023.
After analyzing the CE cases, we found an increase of
$+ 45.6 \pm 21.9\frac{cases}{year}$, with the mean annual irradiation of
the CE events increasing with a rate of
$+ 116.9 \pm 67.8\frac{kJ}{year}$. The most active months of CE events
are May and June. We found that continuous CE events can last up to
$140$ minutes, while the duration of $80\%$ of them is bellow $5$
minutes.

We have observed ECE cases with GHI exceeding the TSI on horizontal
plane by $400\frac{W}{m^{2}}$ while for $75\%$ of the cases the excess
irradiance is below $200\frac{W}{m^{2}}$. The climatological
characteristics of the ECE events showed that the most active months are
spread over half of the year and particularly in the periods March --
June and September -- October. The magnitude of the ECE events
identified in Thessaloniki events does not exceed the values reported
for sites with more favourable conditions for the phenomenon (e.g.,
Cordero et al. 2023). Some of the characteristics of CE and ECE events
we analyzed have strong similarities with the results of Vamvakas,
Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis (2020) for the city of Patras, south of
Thessaloniki, albeit with differences in the magnitude of OI.

An interpretation of the CE trends shows that the interaction of GHI
with the clouds, through this 30-year period, is a dynamic phenomenon
that needs further investigation. For such studies it would be essential
to have more detailed information on cloud characteristics, especially
in order to investigate possible associations of the observed trends
with changes in climate.

Anderson, G. P., J. H. Chetwynd, S. A. Clough, E. P. Shettle, and F. X.
Kneizys. 1986. "AFGL Atmospheric Constituent Profiles (0-120km)." Air
Force Geophysics Laboratory, Optical Physics Division.

Astropy Collaboration, Adrian M. Price-Whelan, Pey Lian Lim, Nicholas
Earl, Nathaniel Starkman, Larry Bradley, David L. Shupe, et al. 2022.
"The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-oriented
Open-source Project and the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core
Package." *Astrophysical Journal* 935 (2): 167.
<https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74>.

Buis, J. P. P., A. Setzer, B. N. N. Holben, T. F. F. Eck, I. Slutsker,
D. Tanre, E. Vermote, et al. 1998. "AERONET---a Federated Instrument
Network and Data Archive for Aerosol Characterization." *Remote Sensing
of Environment* 66 (1): 1--16.

Castillejo-Cuberos, Armando, and Rodrigo Escobar. 2020. "Detection and
Characterization of Cloud Enhancement Events for Solar Irradiance Using
a Model-Independent, Statistically-Driven Approach." *Solar Energy* 209
(October): 547--67. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.09.046>.

Cordero, Raúl R., Sarah Feron, Alessandro Damiani, Edgardo Sepúlveda,
Jose Jorquera, Alberto Redondas, Gunther Seckmeyer, Jorge Carrasco,
Penny Rowe, and Zutao Ouyang. 2023. "Surface Solar Extremes in the Most
Irradiated Region on Earth, Altiplano." *Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society* 104 (6): E1206--21.
<https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-22-0215.1>.

Damiani, Alessandro, Hitoshi Irie, Takashi Horio, Tamio Takamura,
Pradeep Khatri, Hideaki Takenaka, Takashi Nagao, Takashi Y. Nakajima,
and Raul R. Cordero. 2018. "Evaluation of Himawari-8 Surface Downwelling
Solar Radiation by Ground-Based Measurements." *Atmos. Meas. Tech.*

Do Nascimento, Lucas Rafael, Trajano De Souza Viana, Rafael Antunes
Campos, and Ricardo Rüther. 2019. "Extreme Solar Overirradiance Events:
Occurrence and Impacts on Utility-Scale Photovoltaic Power Plants in
Brazil." *Solar Energy* 186 (July): 370--81.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.05.008>.

Dong, Buwen, Rowan T. Sutton, and Laura J. Wilcox. 2023. "Decadal Trends
in Surface Solar Radiation and Cloud Cover over the North Atlantic
Sector During the Last Four Decades: Drivers and Physical Processes."
*Climate Dynamics* 60 (7): 2533--46.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-022-06438-3>.

Emde, Claudia, Robert Buras-Schnell, Arve Kylling, Bernhard Mayer, Josef
Gasteiger, Ulrich Hamann, Jonas Kylling, et al. 2016. "The libRadtran
Software Package for Radiative Transfer Calculations (Version 2.0.1)."
*Geoscientific Model Development* 9 (5): 1647--72.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-9-1647-2016>.

Gardner, G., A. C. Harvey, and G. D. A. Phillips. 1980. "Algorithm AS
154: An Algorithm for Exact Maximum Likelihood Estimation of
Autoregressive-Moving Average Models by Means of Kalman Filtering."
*Applied Statistics* 29 (3): 311. <https://doi.org/10.2307/2346910>.

Giles, David M., Alexander Sinyuk, Mikhail G. Sorokin, Joel S. Schafer,
Alexander Smirnov, Ilya Slutsker, Thomas F. Eck, et al. 2019.
"Advancements in the Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET) Version 3
Database -- Automated Near-Real-Time Quality Control Algorithm with
Improved Cloud Screening for Sun Photometer Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD)
Measurements." *Atmospheric Measurement Techniques* 12 (1): 169--209.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/amt-12-169-2019>.

Graabak, Ingeborg, and Magnus Korpås. 2016. "Variability Characteristics
of European Wind and Solar Power Resources---a Review." *Energies* 9
(6): 449. <https://doi.org/10.3390/en9060449>.

Gray, L. J., J. Beer, M. Geller, J. D. Haigh, M. Lockwood, K. Matthes,
U. Cubasch, et al. 2010. "SOLAR INFLUENCES ON CLIMATE." *Reviews of
Geophysics* 48 (4): RG4001. <https://doi.org/10.1029/2009RG000282>.

Gristey, Jake J., Graham Feingold, K. Sebastian Schmidt, and Hong Chen.
2022. "Influence of Aerosol Embedded in Shallow Cumulus Cloud Fields on
the Surface Solar Irradiance." *Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres* 127 (11): e2022JD036822.
<https://doi.org/10.1029/2022JD036822>.

Gueymard, Christian A. 2017. "Cloud and Albedo Enhancement Impacts on
Solar Irradiance Using High-Frequency Measurements from Thermopile and
Photodiode Radiometers. Part 1: Impacts on Global Horizontal
Irradiance." *Solar Energy* 153: 755--65. <https://doi.org/gb283c>.

Haurwitz, Bernhard. 1945. "Insolation in Relation to Cloudiness and
Cloud Density." *Journal of Meteorology* 2 (September): 154--66.

Inman, Rich H., Hugo T. C. Pedro, and Carlos F. M. Coimbra. 2013. "Solar
Forecasting Methods for Renewable Energy Integration." *Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science* 39 (6): 535--76.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2013.06.002>.

Järvelä, Markku, and Seppo Valkealahti. 2020. "Operation of a PV Power
Plant During Overpower Events Caused by the Cloud Enhancement
Phenomenon." *Energies* 13 (9): 2185.
<https://doi.org/10.3390/en13092185>.

Jones, Richard H. 1980. "Maximum Likelihood Fitting of ARMA Models to
Time Series with Missing Observations." *Technometrics* 22 (3): 389--95.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00401706.1980.10486171>.

Kazadzis, S., A. Bais, V. Amiridis, D. Balis, C. Meleti, N. Kouremeti,
C. S. Zerefos, et al. 2007. "Nine Years of UV Aerosol Optical Depth
Measurements at Thessaloniki, Greece." *Atmospheric Chemistry and
Physics* 7 (8): 2091--101. <https://doi.org/cmjz23>.

Kurucz, Robert L. 1994. "Synthetic Infrared Spectra." In *Infrared Solar
Physics*, edited by D. M. Rabin, J. T. Jefferies, and C. Lindsey,
523--31. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

Lappalainen, Kari, and Jan Kleissl. 2020. "Analysis of the Cloud
Enhancement Phenomenon and Its Effects on Photovoltaic Generators Based
on Cloud Speed Sensor Measurements." *Journal of Renewable and
Sustainable Energy* 12 (4): 043502. <https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0007550>.

Liu, Huan, Ilan Koren, Orit Altaratz, and Mickaël D. Chekroun. 2023.
"Opposing Trends of Cloud Coverage over Land and Ocean Under Global
Warming." *Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics* 23 (11): 6559--69.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-23-6559-2023>.

Long, Charles N., and Y. Shi. 2006. "The QCRad Value Added Product:
Surface Radiation Measurement Quality Control Testing, Including
Climatology Configurable Limits." DOE/SC-ARM/TR-074. Office of Science,
Office of Biological; Environmental Research, U.S. Department of Energy.

---------. 2008. "An Automated Quality Assessment and Control Algorithm
for Surface Radiation Measurements." *The Open Atmospheric Science
Journal*, 23--37.

Martins, G. L., S. L. Mantelli, and R. Rüther. 2022. "Evaluating the
Performance of Radiometers for Solar Overirradiance Events." *Solar
Energy* 231 (January): 47--56.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2021.11.050>.

Mol, Wouter B., Wouter H. Knap, and Chiel C. Van Heerwaarden. 2023. "Ten
Years of 1 Hz Solar Irradiance Observations at Cabauw, the Netherlands,
with Cloud Observations, Variability Classifications, and Statistics."
*Earth System Science Data* 15 (5): 2139--51.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-15-2139-2023>.

Natsis, Athanasios, Alkiviadis Bais, and Charikleia Meleti. 2023.
"Trends from 30-Year Observations of Downward Solar Irradiance in
Thessaloniki, Greece." *Applied Sciences* 14 (1): 252.
<https://doi.org/10.3390/app14010252>.

Pecenak, Zachary K., Felipe A. Mejia, Ben Kurtz, Amato Evan, and Jan
Kleissl. 2016. "Simulating Irradiance Enhancement Dependence on Cloud
Optical Depth and Solar Zenith Angle." *Solar Energy* 136 (October):
675--81. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.07.045>.

R Core Team. 2023. *R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing*. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
[https://www.R-project.org/](https://www.r-project.org/).

Thuillier, Gérard, Jean-Marie Perrin, Philippe Keckhut, and François
Huppert. 2013. "Local Enhanced Solar Irradiance on the Ground Generated
by Cirrus: Measurements and Interpretation." *Journal of Applied Remote
Sensing* 7 (1): 073543. <https://doi.org/10.1117/1.JRS.7.073543>.

Tzoumanikas, P., E. Nikitidou, A. F. Bais, and A. Kazantzidis. 2016.
"The Effect of Clouds on Surface Solar Irradiance, Based on Data from an
All-Sky Imaging System." *Renewable Energy* 95 (September): 314--22.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2016.04.026>.

Vamvakas, Ioannis, Vasileios Salamalikis, and Andreas Kazantzidis. 2020.
"Evaluation of Enhancement Events of Global Horizontal Irradiance Due to
Clouds at Patras, South-West Greece." *Renewable Energy* 151 (xxxx):
764--71. <https://doi.org/gq3sbh>.

Veerman, M. A., B. J. H. Van Stratum, and C. C. Van Heerwaarden. 2022.
"A Case Study of Cumulus Convection over Land in Cloud‐resolving
Simulations with a Coupled Ray Tracer." *Geophysical Research Letters*
49 (23). <https://doi.org/10.1029/2022GL100808>.

Yordanov, G. H., O.-M. Midtgård, T. O. Saetre, H. K. Nielsen, and L. E.
Norum. 2013. "Overirradiance (Cloud Enhancement) Events at High
Latitudes." *IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics* 3 (1): 271--77.
<https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2012.2213581>.

Yordanov, Georgi Hristov, Tor Oskar Saetre, and Ole-Morten Midtgård.
2015. "Extreme Overirradiance Events in Norway: 1.6 Suns Measured Close
to 60°n." *Solar Energy* 115 (May): 68--73.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2015.02.020>.

Zhang, Junfang, Kota Watanabe, Jun Yoshino, Tomonao Kobayashi, Yoshihiro
Hishikawa, and Takuya Doi. 2018. "Physical Process and Statistical
Properties of Solar Irradiance Enhancement Observed Under Clouds."
*Japanese Journal of Applied Physics* 57 (8): 08RG11.
<https://doi.org/10.7567/JJAP.57.08RG11>.
