---
abstract: Here will be the abstract.
date: 2024-05-26
title: Long term cloud enhancement events of global solar irradiance
  over Thessaloniki, Greece
---

# Abstract

We studied the enhancement of the global horizontal irradiance (GHI),
over Thessaloniki, for the period 1993 -- 2023, on one minute average
records. We identify the cloud enhancement events (CE), by creating an
appropriate clear sky irradiance reference with the use of a radiation
transfer model, and aerosol optical depth (AOD) data, from the AERONET,
and a collocated Brewer photospectrometer. We found that there is a
trend of CE cases of $45.6 \pm 21.9\frac{\text{cases}}{\text{year}}$,
and a mean total energy change, of the CE events by
$116.9 \pm 67.8\frac{\text{kj}}{\text{year}}$ with the peak of the CE
events are observed during May and June. An analysis of the total
duration of CE events, showed that durations longer than 5 minutes are
very rare, with exceptions lasting over an hour. We have detected
enhancements over the total solar irradiance, without exceeding the
maximum values reported for other sites, with more favorable CE
conditions.

CE: cloud enhancement cases one minute

ECE: extreme cloud enhancement cases one minute over TSI on horizontal
plane

CEG: cloud enhancement groups, cases events with consecutive CE

$\text{GHI}_{\text{i}}$: measured one minute global horizontal
irradiance

$\text{GHI}_{\text{CSm}}$: modelled clear sky one minute global
horizontal irradiance

# 1 Introduction

The shortwave solar radiation, reaching Earth's surface, is the main
energy source of the atmosphere and the biosphere, and drives and
governs the climate (Gray et al. 2010). It has direct practical
application in industries like energy and agricultural production. The
variability of its intensity can impose difficulties in predicting the
yield and in designing the specifications of the appropriate equipment.
Significant portion of research has been focused on predicting the
renewable energy production in a fine timescale and in near real-time
(for a review see Inman, Pedro, and Coimbra (2013); Graabak and Korpås
(2016)).

An important aspect of the variability of solar radiation is its
interaction with the clouds. In general, clouds can attenuate a fraction
of solar irradiance, but under certain conditions, can lead to
enhancement of the global horizontal irradiance (GHI) reaching the
ground. This effect can locally increase the observed GHI to levels even
higher than the expected clear-sky irradiance \[see references
therein\].

Some of the proposed underling mechanisms of those enhancements, have
been summarized by Gueymard (2017); the most important being the
scattering of radiation on the edges of cumulus clouds. It has been also
suggested that enhancement of GHI can be produced by thin cirrus clouds
though refraction and scattering (Thuillier et al. 2013). Further
investigation with radiative transfer modeling and observations pointed
as the prevailing mechanism, the strong forward Mie scattering through
clouds of low optical depth (Pecenak et al. 2016; Thuillier et al. 2013;
G. H. Yordanov et al. 2013; Georgi Hristov Yordanov, Saetre, and
Midtgård 2015). Overall, enhancement event depend on different
interactive factors, which include cloud thickness, structure and type,
and the relative position of the sun and the clouds (Gueymard 2017;
Veerman, Van Stratum, and Van Heerwaarden 2022).

On multiple sites, cloud enhancements (CE) have been reported to be able
to briefly exceed the value of the solar constant, resulting of
clearness indices above unit. A summary of extreme enchantment cases
(ECE) has been compiled by Martins, Mantelli, and Rüther (2022). There
are also some practical implications of the cloud enchantments. The
intensity and duration of enhancements can effect the efficiency and
stability of photovoltaic power production (Lappalainen and Kleissl
2020; Järvelä and Valkealahti 2020) while ECEs have the potential to
compromise the integrity of photovoltaic plants infrastructure (Do
Nascimento et al. 2019). It has also been demonstrated that these events
can interfere in the comparison of ground-based and satellite
observations (Damiani et al. 2018). Global warming has likely affected
cloud coverage in the last few decades. Liu et al. (2023) reported
increases in cloud cover over the tropical and subtropical oceans and
decreases over most continents, while Dong et al. (2022) reported
decreases over North America and Europe. To our knowledge, there is no
evidence on whether this trend has affected also the number and strength
of CE events.

Methods of identification of CE events usually include the use of
simulated clear sky irradiance as baseline, that is combined with an
appropriate threshold or some other statistical characteristics, and in
some cases, with visual inspection of sky camera images (Vamvakas,
Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis 2020; Mol, Knap, and Van Heerwaarden 2023
and references therein).

In this study, we evaluate the effects CE on GHI by investigating their
frequency of occurrence, intensity, and duration in a thirty-year period
of GHI observations at Thessaloniki, Greece. We used modeled clear sky
irradiance as a baseline to identify cloud enhancements and we
determined long term trends of the above mentioned metrics, their
climatology and some general characteristics. To our knowledge there are
no other studies that provide trends from such long dataset.

In this study, we define an event as CE when the measured GHI at ground
level, exceeds the expected value under clear-sky conditions. Similarly,
we define as extreme cloud enhancement events (ECE), the cases when GHI
at ground level exceeds the Total Solar Irradiance (TSI). Although the
duration of these bursts can vary from seconds to several minutes, here
we are constrained by the temporal resolution of our data to identify
evens with duration of at minimum one-minute.

# 2 Data and methodology

## 2.1 Instrumentation and data

The data used in this study were recorded at the monitoring site of the
Laboratory of Atmospheric Physics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
in Thessaloniki, Greece ($40^{\circ}38'$N, $22^{\circ}57'$E,
$80$m a.s.l.). The GHI data were measured with a Kipp & Zonen CM-21
pyranometer and cover the period 13 April 1993 to 31 December 2023.
During the study period, the pyranometer was independently calibrated
three times at the Meteorologisches Observatorium Lindenberg, DWD,
verifying that the stability of the instrument's sensitivity was better
than $0.7\text{\%}$ relative to the initial calibration by the
manufacturer. For the acquisition of radiometric data, the signal of the
pyranometer was sampled at a rate of $1\text{Hz}$ with the mean and
standard deviation of these samples calculated and recorded every
minute. The measurements were corrected for the zero offset ("dark
signal" in volts), which was calculated by averaging all measurements
recorded for a period of $3\text{h}$, before (morning) or after
(evening) the Sun reaches an elevation angle of $- 10^{\circ}$. The
signal was converted to irradiance using the ramped value of the
instrument's sensitivity between subsequent calibrations.

To further improve the quality of the irradiance data, a manual
screening was performed, in order to remove inconsistent and erroneous
recordings that can occur stochastically or systematically during the
long operation of the instrument. The manual screening was aided by a
radiation data quality assurance procedure, adjusted for the site, which
was based on the methods of Long and Shi (Long and Shi 2006, 2008).
Thus, problematic recordings have been excluded from further processing.
Although it is impossible to detect all false data, the large number of
available data, and the aggregation scheme we used, ensures the quality
of the radiation measurements used in this study. To preserve an
unbiased representation of the data we applied a constraint, similar the
one used by Castillejo-Cuberos and Escobar (2020). For each valid hour
of day, there must exist at least 45 minutes of valid measurements,
including nighttime, when near sunrise and sunset. Days with less than 5
valid hours were rejected completely. Furthermore, due to the
significant measurement uncertainty in GHI when the Sun is near the
horizon, and due to some systematic obstructions by nearby buildings, we
have excluded all measurements with solar zenith angle (SZA) greater
than $78^{\circ}$.

Finally, images from a sky camera have been used in the manual
inspection of the CE identification. The sky camera operates since 2012
and stores images in 5 min time steps.

## 2.2 Cloud enhancement detection

For the detection of CE cases we established a baseline of irradiance
above which we characterized each data point as an enhancement event and
calculated the over irradiance (OIR). The OIR is defined as the
irradiance difference of the measured one-minute $\text{GHI}_{i}$ from
the GHIref corresponding to cloud-free atmosphere.
$\text{OIR}_{i} = \text{GHI}_{i} - \text{GHI}_{\text{CSlim}}$ First, we
tested two simple approaches for the determination of GHref: The
Haurwitz's model (Haurwitz 1945), which is a simple clear sky model and
was already adjusted and applied to our data (Natsis, Bais, and Meleti
2023), and the total solar irradiance (TSI) at the top of the
atmosphere, adjusted for the Sun-Earth distance. We have tested both
methods by using an appropriate relative threshold and/or an additional
constant offset. The initial results showed that we can detect a big
portion of the CE events. However, by inspecting the daily plots of
irradiance it became evident that changes in atmospheric conditions
introduced numerous false positive and false negative results. The main
reason for these discrepancies is the variability of the effects of
aerosols and water vapor which were not taken into account in the two
simple methods. To produce a more representative reference we included
the effects of these factors through variables using a radiative
transfer model (RTM). The applied methodology is discussed in section
2.3.

## 2.3 Modeled clear Sky Irradiance

### 2.3.1 Climatology of clear sky irradiance

We approximated the expected clear sky GHIref with the radiative
transfer model uvspec, part of libRadtran (Emde et al. 2016), similarly
to the approach used by Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis (2020).
In uvspec we used the solar spectrum of Kurucz (1994) in the range $280$
to $2500\text{nm}$, the radiative transfer solver "disort" in
"pseudospherical" geometry and the "LOWTRAN" gas parameterization. The
model was run for a range of variables in order to create a look up
table (LUT) for the estimation of the cloud-free reference irradiance
for each individual observation of our dataset. In this context, the
model was run for SZAs in the range 10-90° with a step of
${0.2}^{\circ}$ and for the atmospheric profiles of the Air Force
Geophysics Laboratory (Anderson et al. 1986) midlatitude summer and
midlatitude winter, representative of the warm and cold seasons.

Main factors responsible for the attenuation of the broadband downward
solar radiation under cloud free atmospheres are aerosols and water
vapor. At Thessaloniki, such measurements are available since 2003 from
the Cimel sun photometer that belongs to the Aerosol Robotic Network
(AERONET) (Giles et al. 2019; Buis et al. 1998). From the observations
in the period 2003-2023 we calculated the monthly climatological means
and standard deviation (σ) for the aerosol optical depth (AOD) at 500 nm
and the equivalent height of the water column (WC) . The monthly
climatological values of AOD and water column, as well as combinations
with additional offsets of $\pm 1$σ and $\pm 2\sigma$, were used as
inputs to the RTM in the construction of the LUT.

For each measurement of the dataset, we calculated from the LUT a GHIref
value for the respective season and SZA (by linear interpolation), and
for the climatological values of AOD and WC of the respective month. The
same procedure was followed for the estimation of the GHIref for all
combinations of the AOD and WC with the above mentioned standard
deviation offsets. Finally, each GHIref value was adjusted to the actual
Sun-Earth distance derived by the Astropy software library (Astropy
Collaboration et al. 2022).

$280$$2500\text{nm}$${0.2}^{\circ}$$500\text{nm}$$\tau_{500\text{nm}}$$\pm 1$$\pm 2\sigma$$w$$\pm 1$$\pm 2\sigma$

2.3.2 Long term change of clear sky irradiance

The above clear sky reference values are based on the climatological AOD
and WC, hence they cannot describe accurately the long term variation of
GHIref due to changes in the two atmospheric constituents, mainly AOD.
As reported by Natsis, Bais, and Meleti (2023), there is a long term
brightening effect in the GHI data of Thessaloniki for the period
1993-2023, which for clear-sky data was attributed to long-term changes
in aerosol effects. Therefore, an adjustment of the GHIref used in this
study is necessary. As AERONET data start only in 2003, we used for the
period 1993 -- 2005 estimates of changes in AOD at 340 nm derived from a
collocated Brewer spectrophotometer (Kazadzis et al. 2007) to calculate
the trend in GHIref during this period. $- 3.8\text{\%}$$340\text{nm}$

To create a unified trend for the long term change of the clear sky
irradiance, we simulated the values of AOD derived from those sources
with Libradtran. For both inputs, we used the AOD at $500\text{nm}$,
which was inferred by the available Ångström coefficients. We choose the
SZA of $55^{\circ}$ as a representative value for all the runs.

According to this study, in the period 1997 -- 2005 the mean AOD at
$340\text{nm}$ $0.403$ with a trend of $- 3.8 \pm 0.93\text{\%}$ per
year, corresponding to a change of $0.0153$ per year . Using an Ångström
coefficient $\alpha = 1.6$, this translates to a change in the Ångström
coefficient $\beta = 0.00272$ per year (or $\beta = 0.084$ in 1997 and
$\beta = 0.059$ in 2005). Simulations with uvspec for the above Ångström
coefficients, a fixed WC of XXX and for a SZA of 55° reveal a trend of
$0.21\text{\%}$ per year in GHIref. The SZA of 55° was chosen as
representative of all days in the year in order to get a rough estimate
of the annually averaged change in clear sky irradiance. For the period
2005 -- 2023 we used the mean monthly values of AOD and WC from AERONET
in a similar simulation scheme to calculate the monthly mean of clear
sky irradiance, and finally the trend of $0.14\text{\%}$ per year. We
applied these two long term changes (see Figure 2.1) to the
climatological GHIref in order to create a more realistic representation
of the clear-sky irradiance for the whole period of study.

![Figure 2.1: Simulated long term change of the clear sky irradiance
relevant to its climatological values, due to changed of
AOD.](media/image1.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.651388888888889in"}

Figure 2.1: Simulated long term change in clear sky irradiance relative
to the climatological values due to changes in AOD.

## 2.4 Criteria for the identification of CE events

In this study our main focus was to quantify over irradiance events
related to CEs. A key issue for achieving this goal is to define a
threshold for the CE identification, representative of the clear-sky
irradiance at the time of each GHI measurement. This depends on the
selection of the appropriate atmospheric parameterization for the RTM
simulations. The implementation of the long term change of AOD,
discussed in section 2.3, allows capturing a large part of the natural
variability of clear-sky GHI. However, the short-term variability of AOD
cannot be taken adequately into account when using monthly values for
the model simulations. We tried different approaches to increase the
robustness of the methodology and compensate for the limited accuracy of
the RTM input data and the unpredictable natural variability of the
atmosphere.

First, we evaluated the performance of the modelled GHIref in relation
to the measured GHI for different levels of atmospheric clearness, by
using in the RTM the monthly climatological AOD and WC, less their
respective standard deviations.
$\tau_{\text{cs}} = \tau_{500\text{nm}} - 1\sigma$$w_{h\text{cs}} = w_{h} - 1\sigma$$\text{GHI}_{\text{CSm}}$These
values represent typical atmospheres in Thessaloniki with lower than
average load of aerosols and humidity, which are the main factors that
attenuate the GHI, excluding clouds. With this approach the simulated
GHIref should be generally greater than the measured GHI when aerosols
are more abundant. To compensate for this, , we increased the GHIref by
$4\text{\%}$ with an additional constant offset of
$15\frac{\text{W}}{\text{m}^{2}}$., as described in Equation).

where: $\text{E}$ the measured irradiance, $\text{E}_{\text{CSm}}$ the
selected modelled clear sky irradiance, and $i$ each of the one-minute
observation. This is the criterion of our CE identification.

These values were determined through the implementation of an empirical
method with manual inspection of the CE identification results on
selected days of the whole dataset. We used seven sets of days with
characteristics relevant to the efficiency of the identification
threshold. These sets were random groups of about 20 -- 30 days with the
following characteristics: (a) the strongest over irradiance CE events,
(b) the largest daily total over irradiance, (c) absence of clouds (by
implementing a clear sky identification algorithm as discussed in
Natsis, Bais, and Meleti (2023)), (d) absence of clouds and absence of
EC events, (e) with at least $60\text{\%}$ of the day length without
clouds and presence of EC events, (h) randomly selected days, and (i)
manually selected days. Where needed in some of the edge cases, we also
used images from a sky-camera to further aid the decision of the manual
inspection.

The definition of the CE events with this method has a degree of
subjectivity, since the actual clear sky irradiance is not known and can
only be approximated. However, this method is capable in detecting all
major CE events. Where some CE events with very low OIR may be not
detected, these are few with small over-irradiance and it is unlikely
that will effect significantly our results.

A sub-category of the CE events that is often discussed in the relevant
bibliography (ref), are the extreme cloud enhancement (ECE) events.
These are cases of CE where the measured intensity of the irradiance
exceeds the TSI at the top of the atmosphere:

where: $\theta$ the solar zenith angle, $E_{\odot}$ the solar constant
adjusted for the actual $r$Sun -- Earth distance, and $i$ each of the
one-minute observation.

An example of CE identification for a selected day is given in the
Appendix (Figure), where the daily course of the clear sky reference
irradiance and the CE and ECE identification thresholds are shown along
with the actual GHI measurements. In addition, we provide an example
scatter plot between the measured and the modeled clear-sky irradiance
for one year, where the CE and ECE events are clearly grouped above the
threshold of irradiance. (Appendix Figure).

# 3 Results

Following the application of the above discussed methodology to the
entire dataset (6.1 million of one-minute GHI measurements),
$1.76\text{\%}$ were identified as CE events and $0.0\text{\%}$ as ECE
events. The highest recorded GHI due to CE was $1416.6\frac{W}{m^{2}}$
on 24 May 2007, corresponding to OIR of $345.9\frac{W}{m^{2}}$. The
relative stronger CE event of $49.7\text{\%}$ above the clear sky
threshold was observed on 28 October 2016. In the following sections we
are discussing the long-term trends and variability of the CE events as
well as of the corresponding OIR and excess irradiation .

## 3.1 Long-term trends

The main focus of this study is to investigate the time evolution of the
CE events by analyzing the GHI measurements at Thessaloniki. Cloud
enhancements can be influenced by different factors, such as the
geometry, size and optical thickness of clouds, their height in the
atmosphere and on local weather regimes (ref). Some of these factors are
related to changes in climate; hence it would be reasonable to expect
capturing their contributions to the frequency of occurrence of CE
events over Thessaloniki, as well as to the average OIR and excess
irradiation. The long-term trends were calculated using a first-order
autoregressive model with the 'maximum likelihood' fitting method
(Gardner, Harvey, and Phillips 1980; Jones 1980), by implementing the
function 'arima' from the library 'stats' of the R programming language
(R Core Team 2023). All trends are reported together with their
$2\sigma$ error.

Figure 3 shows the time series of the yearly number of CE cases (each
with duration of one minute), the yearly mean OIR and the yearly excess
irradiation for the period 1993--2023, together with corresponding
linear trends. All three quantities show increasing trends, most
pronounced for the frequency of occurrence $$) and the excess
irradiation ($116.9 \pm 67.8\text{k}$$$, which are also statistically
significant. In contrast the trend of the yearly mean OIR is negligible
($0.087 \pm 0.08\frac{\frac{\text{W}}{\text{m}^{2}}}{\text{year}}$and of
no statistical significance. The average OIR for the entire period is
about 40 W/m^2^. The interannual variability of the data about the trend
lines is quite large. Furthermore, it tends to increase with time (at
least for the quantities of panels a and c), suggesting a significant
variability in cloud patterns over the area, possibly associated to
changes in climate. Discuss extremes?

$45.6 \pm 21.9\frac{\text{cases}}{\text{year}}$$116.9 \pm 67.8\frac{\text{kj}}{\text{year}}$Of
note that the excess irradiation related to the CE events can not be
directly linked to the total energy balance of the atmosphere. The net
solar radiation of the region is not increased, but is rather
redistributed through the CE events. This is also depicted by the
"instantaneous" values of irradiance (average over one minute), that can
exceed the equivalent clear sky irradiance to a considerable level.

![Figure 3.1: Trend of yearly CE number of
occurancies.](media/image2.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6395833333333334in"}(a)

![](media/image3.wmf){width="6.0in" height="3.6493055555555554in"}(b)
![Figure 3.2: Trend of the yearly excess energy due to CE over
irradiance](media/image4.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6395833333333334in"}(c)

Figure 3: Time series for the period 1992--2023 of (a) the yearly CE
number of occurrences, (b) the yearly mean OIR and (c) the yearly excess
irradiation. The black lines represent the linear trends on the yearly
data.

## 

## 3.2 Climatology of cloud enhancement events

Another interesting aspect of the CE events is their distribution within
the year.. Figure shows the monthly box and whisker plot of the CE
number of occurrence normalized with the highest median value that
occurs in June, depicting a clear seasonal cycle. Although CE events are
present throughout the year, the most active period is during May and
June. During winter (December -- February), the number of CE cases is
about $25\text{\%}$ of the maximum, while in the intermediate months the
number of occurrences gradually ramps between the maximum and minimum.
This seasonality is a combined effect of different factors, among them
the types of clouds, their frequency of occurrence the seasonally
varying relative position of the sun, as well as the local landscape
characteristics that may influence the formation of clouds.
Unfortunately, lack of detailed data on cloud formation, type and
location is not allowing further analysis. The interannual variability
of the monthly CE events is quite high as manifested by the large
monthly extremes, especially in the summer.

![Figure 3.3: Seasonal statistics of the number of CE occurancies for
each month, normalized to the maximum occurancies on June. The box
represents the values of the low 25\\,\\% percentile to 75\\,\\%
percentile, where the thick horizontal line inside is the mean, the
verical lines extend to the macimum and minimum vales, the dots are
outlier values, and the rhombus is the
mean.](media/image5.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.4743055555555555in"}

Figure 4: Seasonal variability of the number of CE events normalized to
the maximum occurring in June, in the form of a box and whisker plot.
The box contains the data between the lower 25% and the upper 75%
percentiles. The thick horizontal line and the diamond symbol represent
the median and the mean values, respectively. The vertical lines
(whiskers) extend between the maximum and minimum monthly values and the
solid circles are outliers.

The distribution of the number of CE events as a function of OIR is
shown in Figure 3.4. Apparently, there is an inverse relation between
the frequency of CE events and OIR with a exponential-like decline. This
is expected, as the stronger the CE events become, the rarer are the
conditions favoring the occurrence of CE events. For the majority (over
60%) of the CE events the OIR is below the long term average of 40
W/m^2^, while about 10% of the events correspond to OIR larger than 100
W/m^2^ and up to highest value of 300 W/m^2^. . This distribution is
indicative of the magnitude and the probability of the expected CE
events over Thessaloniki. Similar distribution of CE events, albeit with
larger OIR values, has been reported by Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and
Kazantzidis (2020) for the city of Patras. This cite is located 2.5°
south of Thessaloniki and is exposed to air masses coming mainly from
the eastern Mediterranean resulting in different cloud patterns, that
may affect the characteristics and magnitude of the CE events.
${2.5}^{\circ}$

![Figure 3.4: Distribution of CE over irradiance
magnitude.](media/image6.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.7069444444444444in"}

Figure 3.4: Relative frequency distribution of CE events as a function
of OIR.

## 3.3 Duration of cloud enhancement events

The duration of the CE events is variable and can last for several
minutes or even more than an hour. In order to study the characteristics
of these consecutive events, we grouped them into bins of increasing
duration in steps of one minute. The longest duration of 140 minutes
occurred on 07 July 2013. Figure 5 shows the frequency distribution of
the CE events according to their duration. We conclude that although
some groups of events last for more than an hour about $80\text{\%}$
have duration of less than 5 minutes.

![Figure 3.5: Distribution of CE groups duration in
minutes.](media/image7.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6590277777777778in"}

Figure 3.5: Relative frequency distribution of CE groups of consequent
CE events according to their duration.

The relation between the duration of the CE groups and the excess
irradiation of the groups has also been investigated (Figure).
Evidently, evens of high excess irradiation have small duration and vice
versa. The vast majority of grouped events are associated with small
excess irradiation (e.g. \< 5 kJ/m2) and small duration (e.g. \< 5 min)
while groups with strong excess irradiation and long duration are very
rare. Similar results of this relation have been reported by Zhang et
al. (2018) in a study using a far higher sampling rate than ours.

![Figure 3.6: Relation of the mean over irradiance and duration of GCE,
where the color scale donotes the frequency of the respected
events.](media/image8.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6875in"}

Figure 3.6: Relation of excess irradiation of CE groups with their
duration. The logarithmic color scale denotes the frequency of the
respective groups of events.

## 3.4 Extreme cloud enhancement events

An aspect of the CE events that is commonly reported and has some
significance on the solar energy production infrastructure are the
extreme CE events (ECE). Where solar irradiance exceeds the expected
irradiance on top of the atmosphere (Equation). Analogous to Figure we
have computed the distribution of the number of occurrences of ECE
events by month in Figure. The most active period for ECE events is in
the spring and the start of the summer (March -- June), followed by a
period in the late fall (September and October). This is probably
related to the weather characteristics of these periods, where there are
continuous alternations between clear sky periods and clouds.

![Figure 3.7: Seasonal statistics of the number of ECE occurancies for
each month, normalized to the maximum occurancies on March. The box
represents the values of the low 25\\,\\% percentile to 75\\,\\%
percentile, where the thick horizontal line inside is the mean, the
verical lines extend to the macimum and minimum vales, the dots are
outlier values, and the rhombus is the
mean.](media/image9.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.4743055555555555in"}

Figure 3.7: Seasonal statistics of the number of ECE occurancies for
each month, normalized to the maximum occurancies on March. The box
represents the values of the low $25\text{\%}$ percentile to
$75\text{\%}$ percentile, where the thick horizontal line inside is the
mean, the verical lines extend to the macimum and minimum vales, the
dots are outlier values, and the rhombus is the mean.

The distribution of the ECE events (Figure), shows that there are rare
cases where the OIR can exceed the TSI even more than
$400\frac{\text{W}}{\text{m}^{2}}$, with the $75\text{\%}$ of the cases
to be below $200\frac{\text{W}}{\text{m}^{2}}$. Those finds are in
accordance with results form Vamvakas, Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis
(2020), with the difference that the OIR values are lower for
Thessaloniki.

![Figure 3.8: Distribution of ECE above clear sky threshold, for cases
that are exceeding the
TSI.](media/image10.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6590277777777778in"}

Figure 3.8: Distribution of ECE above clear sky threshold, for cases
that are exceeding the TSI.

# 4 Discussion and conclusions

By creating a clear sky approximation of the GHI, which represents the
long- and short-term variation of the expected clear sky GHI, we were
able to identify cases of CE events. After analyzing the CE cases, we
found an increase of $45.6 \pm 21.9\frac{\text{cases}}{\text{year}}$,
with the mean annual total energy of the CE events increasing with a
rate of $116.9 \pm 67.8\frac{\text{kj}}{\text{year}}$. The most active
season of CE events over Thessaloniki is concentrated on early summer,
on May and June.

The magnitude of the ECE events doesn't exceeds the values reported from
sites with more favourable conditions for the phenomenon. Although, the
climatological characteristic of the ECE events, showed that the most
active months are spread on half of the year (March -- June and
September and October). We found that CE conditions, can have a duration
of more than an hour in rare cases, with the bulk of the cases having a
duration under 5 minutes. Some of the characteristics of CE and ECE
events we analysed, have strong similarities with results by Vamvakas,
Salamalikis, and Kazantzidis (2020), for a city southern of
Thessaloniki, with the analogues differences on the intensity of the
solar radiation.

An interpretation of the CE trends, shows that the interaction of GHI
with the clouds, through this 30 year period, is a dynamic phenomenon
that's needs further investigation. Although, to approach it, we need
more long term observations of AOD and clouds characteristics.

# Appendix

![Figure 4.1: Example of cloud indentification data for 2019-07-11.
Where are denoted with red circles all the detected CE events, the cloud
intearaction with the GHI (blue crosses), and the thesholds of CE and
the threshold of ECE events with red and black line
respectively.](media/image11.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.8333333333333335in"}

Figure 4.1: Example of cloud indentification for 2019-07-11. The green
line with blue symbols depicts the measured GHI in one minute steps. The
red line shows the modelled threshold for the detection of CE events,
which are denoted with red circles. The black curve represents the TSI
at the top of the atmosphere, adjusted for the actual Sun-Earth distance
and multiplied by the cosine of the cosine of SZA.

![Figure 4.2: Example of the relation of the measured GHI versus the
reference clear sky irradiance for the year 2005, where the intesity of
the detected over irradianse (OIR) is color
coded.](media/image12.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.6277777777777778in"}

Figure 4.2: Example scatter plot of the measured GHI and the reference
clear sky irradiance for the year 2005. The over-irradiance for CE and
ECE events is color coded, while the remaining data points are shown in
black.

Anderson, G. P., J. H. Chetwynd, S. A. Clough, E. P. Shettle, and F. X.
Kneizys. 1986. "AFGL Atmospheric Constituent Profiles (0-120km)." Air
Force Geophysics Laboratory, Optical Physics Division.

Astropy Collaboration, Adrian M. Price-Whelan, Pey Lian Lim, Nicholas
Earl, Nathaniel Starkman, Larry Bradley, David L. Shupe, et al. 2022.
"The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-oriented
Open-source Project and the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core
Package." *Astrophysical Journal* 935 (2): 167.
<https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74>.

Buis, J. P. P., A. Setzer, B. N. N. Holben, T. F. F. Eck, I. Slutsker,
D. Tanre, E. Vermote, et al. 1998. "AERONET---a Federated Instrument
Network and Data Archive for Aerosol Characterization." *Remote Sensing
of Environment* 66 (1): 1--16.

Castillejo-Cuberos, Armando, and Rodrigo Escobar. 2020. "Detection and
Characterization of Cloud Enhancement Events for Solar Irradiance Using
a Model-Independent, Statistically-Driven Approach." *Solar Energy* 209
(October): 547--67. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.09.046>.

Coddington, Odele, Judith L. Lean, Doug Lindholm, Peter Pilewskie,
Martin Snow, and NOAA CDR Program. 2005. "NOAA Climate Data Record (CDR)
of Total Solar Irradiance (TSI), NRLTSI Version 2. Daily."
<https://doi.org/10.7289/V55B00C1>.

Damiani, Alessandro, Hitoshi Irie, Takashi Horio, Tamio Takamura,
Pradeep Khatri, Hideaki Takenaka, Takashi Nagao, Takashi Y. Nakajima,
and Raul R. Cordero. 2018. "Evaluation of Himawari-8 Surface Downwelling
Solar Radiation by Ground-Based Measurements." *Atmos. Meas. Tech.*

Do Nascimento, Lucas Rafael, Trajano De Souza Viana, Rafael Antunes
Campos, and Ricardo Rüther. 2019. "Extreme Solar Overirradiance Events:
Occurrence and Impacts on Utility-Scale Photovoltaic Power Plants in
Brazil." *Solar Energy* 186 (July): 370--81.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.05.008>.

Emde, Claudia, Robert Buras-Schnell, Arve Kylling, Bernhard Mayer, Josef
Gasteiger, Ulrich Hamann, Jonas Kylling, et al. 2016. "The libRadtran
Software Package for Radiative Transfer Calculations (Version 2.0.1)."
*Geoscientific Model Development* 9 (5): 1647--72.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-9-1647-2016>.

Gardner, G., A. C. Harvey, and G. D. A. Phillips. 1980. "Algorithm AS
154: An Algorithm for Exact Maximum Likelihood Estimation of
Autoregressive-Moving Average Models by Means of Kalman Filtering."
*Applied Statistics* 29 (3): 311. <https://doi.org/10.2307/2346910>.

Giles, David M., Alexander Sinyuk, Mikhail G. Sorokin, Joel S. Schafer,
Alexander Smirnov, Ilya Slutsker, Thomas F. Eck, et al. 2019.
"Advancements in the Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET) Version 3
Database -- Automated Near-Real-Time Quality Control Algorithm with
Improved Cloud Screening for Sun Photometer Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD)
Measurements." *Atmospheric Measurement Techniques* 12 (1): 169--209.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/amt-12-169-2019>.

Graabak, Ingeborg, and Magnus Korpås. 2016. "Variability Characteristics
of European Wind and Solar Power Resources---a Review." *Energies* 9
(6): 449. <https://doi.org/10.3390/en9060449>.

Gray, L. J., J. Beer, M. Geller, J. D. Haigh, M. Lockwood, K. Matthes,
U. Cubasch, et al. 2010. "SOLAR INFLUENCES ON CLIMATE." *Reviews of
Geophysics* 48 (4): RG4001. <https://doi.org/10.1029/2009RG000282>.

Gueymard, Christian A. 2017. "Cloud and Albedo Enhancement Impacts on
Solar Irradiance Using High-Frequency Measurements from Thermopile and
Photodiode Radiometers. Part 1: Impacts on Global Horizontal
Irradiance." *Solar Energy* 153: 755--65. <https://doi.org/gb283c>.

Haurwitz, Bernhard. 1945. "Irradiation in Relation to Cloudiness and
Cloud Density." *Journal of Meteorology* 2 (September): 154--66.

Inman, Rich H., Hugo T. C. Pedro, and Carlos F. M. Coimbra. 2013. "Solar
Forecasting Methods for Renewable Energy Integration." *Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science* 39 (6): 535--76.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2013.06.002>.

Järvelä, Markku, and Seppo Valkealahti. 2020. "Operation of a PV Power
Plant During Overpower Events Caused by the Cloud Enhancement
Phenomenon." *Energies* 13 (9): 2185.
<https://doi.org/10.3390/en13092185>.

Jones, Richard H. 1980. "Maximum Likelihood Fitting of ARMA Models to
Time Series with Missing Observations." *Technometrics* 22 (3): 389--95.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00401706.1980.10486171>.

Kazadzis, S., A. Bais, V. Amiridis, D. Balis, C. Meleti, N. Kouremeti,
C. S. Zerefos, et al. 2007. "Nine Years of UV Aerosol Optical Depth
Measurements at Thessaloniki, Greece." *Atmospheric Chemistry and
Physics* 7 (8): 2091--101. <https://doi.org/cmjz23>.

Kurucz, Robert L. 1994. "Synthetic Infrared Spectra." In *Infrared Solar
Physics*, edited by D. M. Rabin, J. T. Jefferies, and C. Lindsey,
523--31. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

Lappalainen, Kari, and Jan Kleissl. 2020. "Analysis of the Cloud
Enhancement Phenomenon and Its Effects on Photovoltaic Generators Based
on Cloud Speed Sensor Measurements." *Journal of Renewable and
Sustainable Energy* 12 (4): 043502. <https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0007550>.

Long, Charles N., and Y. Shi. 2006. "The QCRad Value Added Product:
Surface Radiation Measurement Quality Control Testing, Including
Climatology Configurable Limits." DOE/SC-ARM/TR-074. Office of Science,
Office of Biological; Environmental Research, U.S. Department of Energy.

---------. 2008. "An Automated Quality Assessment and Control Algorithm
for Surface Radiation Measurements." *The Open Atmospheric Science
Journal*, 23--37.

Martins, G. L., S. L. Mantelli, and R. Rüther. 2022. "Evaluating the
Performance of Radiometers for Solar Overirradiance Events." *Solar
Energy* 231 (January): 47--56.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2021.11.050>.

Mol, Wouter B., Wouter H. Knap, and Chiel C. Van Heerwaarden. 2023. "Ten
Years of 1 Hz Solar Irradiance Observations at Cabauw, the Netherlands,
with Cloud Observations, Variability Classifications, and Statistics."
*Earth System Science Data* 15 (5): 2139--51.
<https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-15-2139-2023>.

Natsis, Athanasios, Alkiviadis Bais, and Charikleia Meleti. 2023.
"Trends from 30-Year Observations of Downward Solar Irradiance in
Thessaloniki, Greece." *Applied Sciences* 14 (1): 252.
<https://doi.org/10.3390/app14010252>.

Pecenak, Zachary K., Felipe A. Mejia, Ben Kurtz, Amato Evan, and Jan
Kleissl. 2016. "Simulating Irradiance Enhancement Dependence on Cloud
Optical Depth and Solar Zenith Angle." *Solar Energy* 136 (October):
675--81. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.07.045>.

R Core Team. 2023. *R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing*. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
<https://www.R-project.org/>.

Thuillier, Gérard, Jean-Marie Perrin, Philippe Keckhut, and François
Huppert. 2013. "Local Enhanced Solar Irradiance on the Ground Generated
by Cirrus: Measurements and Interpretation." *Journal of Applied Remote
Sensing* 7 (1): 073543. <https://doi.org/10.1117/1.JRS.7.073543>.

Vamvakas, Ioannis, Vasileios Salamalikis, and Andreas Kazantzidis. 2020.
"Evaluation of Enhancement Events of Global Horizontal Irradiance Due to
Clouds at Patras, South-West Greece." *Renewable Energy* 151 (xxxx):
764--71. <https://doi.org/gq3sbh>.

Veerman, M. A., B. J. H. Van Stratum, and C. C. Van Heerwaarden. 2022.
"A Case Study of Cumulus Convection over Land in Cloud‐resolving
Simulations with a Coupled Ray Tracer." *Geophysical Research Letters*
49 (23). <https://doi.org/10.1029/2022GL100808>.

Yordanov, G. H., O.-M. Midtgård, T. O. Saetre, H. K. Nielsen, and L. E.
Norum. 2013. "Overirradiance (Cloud Enhancement) Events at High
Latitudes." *IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics* 3 (1): 271--77.
<https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2012.2213581>.

Yordanov, Georgi Hristov, Tor Oskar Saetre, and Ole-Morten Midtgård.
2015. "Extreme Overirradiance Events in Norway: 1.6 Suns Measured Close
to 60°n." *Solar Energy* 115 (May): 68--73.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2015.02.020>.

Zhang, Junfang, Kota Watanabe, Jun Yoshino, Tomonao Kobayashi, Yoshihiro
Hishikawa, and Takuya Doi. 2018. "Physical Process and Statistical
Properties of Solar Irradiance Enhancement Observed Under Clouds."
*Japanese Journal of Applied Physics* 57 (8): 08RG11.
<https://doi.org/10.7567/JJAP.57.08RG11>.
